
TABLE OF CONTENTS
FOREWORD..................................................................3
HALASTER'S GAME ..................................................4

Roleplaying the Mad Mage........................................7

Halaster's Goals: Redefined ..............................5

Gags & Gimmicks..............................................5

Dungeon of the Mad Mage........................................7

Weekly Dungeon Profiles...................................8

Transplanar Advertisements ............................11

Dungeon Overview...................................................10

Factions of Undermountain.............................13

Magic Items by Level .......................................14

Dungeon Inhabitants........................................17

Gate Map .........................................................22

Weave Addiction ..............................................23

Environmental Hazards ...................................23

Other Adventuring Parties...............................24

Character Creation...................................................26

L1: THE DUNGEON LEVEL ..................................30

Random Encounters.................................................31

Areas of Note............................................................32

Epilogue....................................................................36

L2: THE ARCANE CHAMBERS ............................37

Random Encounters.................................................37

Areas of Note............................................................38

Epilogue....................................................................44

L3: THE SARGAUTH LEVEL ................................45

Areas of Note............................................................46

Epilogue....................................................................52

SKULLPORT...............................................................53

Approaching Skullport.............................................55

Areas of Note............................................................57

Epilogue....................................................................63

APPENDIX A: MAGIC ITEMS ...............................64
APPENDIX B: NPCS & MONSTERS ..................66

ART CREDITS
All hail our glorious artist:
Cover: Skeleton Attacking by Dean Spencer, 

hallowed be his name

LEGAL STUFF

DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, Forgotten 
Realms, the dragon ampersand, Player’s Handbook, Monster Manual, 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, D&D Adventurers League, all other 
Wizards of the Coast product names, and their respective logos are 
trademarks of Wizards of the Coast in the USA and other countries. 
All characters and their distinctive likenesses are property of Wizards 
of the Coast. This material is protected under the copyright laws of the 
United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the 
material or artwork contained herein is prohibited without the express 
written permission of Wizards of the Coast.

©2016 Wizards of the Coast LLC, PO Box 707, Renton, WA 98057-
0707, USA. Manufactured by Hasbro SA, Rue Emile-Boéchat 31, 2800 
Delémont, CH. Represented by Hasbro Europe, 4 The Square, Stockley 
Park, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB11 1ET, UK.


3

FOREWORD
Dungeon of the Mad Mage is a tough nut to crack. Even 
after digesting its twenty-three chapters, you're left 
wanting, wondering. What, exactly, is this campaign's 
story? What aims are there beyond gold or glory or 
power—beyond just delving into the deeps?

The Dungeon of the Mad Mage Companion is aimed at 

fleshing out what would be an otherwise skeletal module. 
Through narration blocks, variants, and actual narrative, 
the Companion should make running DotMM easier for 
you and more satisfying for your players. No adventure is 
perfect, but DotMM's lack of a narrative is glaring—hence 
the founding reason for the Companion. 

SHORTHAND
With even just five chapters per document, this 
supplement is massive. The following shorthand must be 
implemented to reduce the strain on your printer or the 
scroll wheel of your poor, poor mouse:
DoTMM refers to this module, Dungeon of the Mad Mage. 
LX refers to a level of Undermountain (e.g. "L1").
Appx refers to an Appendix, either of the of the 

Companion or Dungeon of the Mad Mage itself. 

Ch. refers to a chapter. Intuitive, right?
HG refers to Halaster's Game, the overview chapter of 

the Companion & DotMM. 

STRUCTURE OF THE COMPANION
Each chapter of the Companion follows this structure:

PREAMBLE OR "RUNNING LEVEL X"
The Companion opens with notes on how to best run that 
level of Undermountain. It always includes quick notes 
for the DM but might also break down the story of that 
level, outline its factions, detail additional loot you can 
add, or criticize how that chapter was written, providing 
you with alternative ideas to running it. 

Halaster's Game. The Companion depicts the Mad 

Mage as a deranged gameshow host whose program, 
Dungeon of the Mad Mage, is broadcasted across the 
multiverse. In specific chapters of the Companion, 
however, this also includes wide-reaching variants that 
you can utilize to flesh out or improve that level. 

AREAS OF NOTE
The Companion fleshes out areas of a particular level that 
need it. Sometimes this is simply a narration block to read 
to your players. Sometimes it includes tactics used by 
NPCs there or additional loot. Often it includes tips to 
better run that area, even if it alters DotMM. 

Special Events. Many levels have special events written 

that can occur in a multitude of areas. These serve as 
narrative devices to shake things up. Use them at your 
own discretion. 

EPILOGUE
The epilogue details any possible paths that might occur 
after finishing a level, as well as reminding you of what 
level the party should reach.

Send-Offs. Each chapter of the Companion is written 

with a narration you can use to cap-off your session. 
Every send-off includes one in which the Mad Mage 
telepathically speaks to the adventurers and the audience. 
These messages may include quips, a moral to the story, 
warnings, jests, foreshadowing, or even an announcement 
of the next dungeon level.

APPENDIX A: MAGIC ITEMS
Magic items—and sometimes mundane items—are 
detailed in Appendix A. The location thereof is also 
included. Some chapters of the Companion add additional 
loot to the mix since Undermountain often seems 
deprived of any useful items. Spell scrolls, however, 
aren't ever described in Appendix A.

APPENDIX B: NPCS & MONSTERS
The statistics of the NPCs and monsters that inhabit a 
level are provided for you in Appendix B. Additionally, 
some chapters of the Companion include new or different 
monsters you can add to the level; these statistics are also 
provided for you. 

Exceptions. Over 230 unique creatures are in Dungeon 

of the Mad Mage. To avoid bloating these supplements, 
CR 0 creatures such as cats aren't included. So too are 
spellcasters with different spells prepared than their 
original statblock, as well as creatures whose variants are 
just too trivial to detail—such as a wood elf bandit who 
merely gains an additional 5 feet of movement or the 
additional hit points an enlarged mimic might have. 

Additionally, the many petrified creatures of Level 2, 

Area 26 are not included.


4

HALASTER'S GAME

The entirety of the DotMM Companion is written 
assuming that you, the Dungeon Master will run the Mad 
Mage as a deranged gameshow host. This section not only 
provides the framework for that, but also additional tips 
and tricks that can work whether you roleplay Halaster in 
this manner or not. 

ROLEPLAYING THE MAD MAGE
The Mad Mage himself is easily the greatest facet of this 
adventure and providing him facetime is what will make 
DotMM memorable for your players. 

The Show Must Go On. In the Companion, Halaster is 

rewritten as a deranged gameshow host whose program, 
Dungeon of the Mad Mage, is apparently broadcasted 
across the multiverse. Every season, he selects an 
adventuring party as his "contestants" and challenges 
them to delve deeper into Undermountain. Gold, glory, 
and power await those that can best the dungeon's horrors 
and challenges—and so too freedom from his game. 

Sarcastic Sadist. Halaster can speak telepathically to 

just about any creature in Undermountain, so long as he's 
aware of their presence. He uses this power to irk the 
contestants and other characters—or to speak directly to 
the "audience" of the show. Often, he'll screw with the 
contestants by including them in these messages, 
foreshadowing horrors to come or taunting their failures. 
His cryptic or hilariously vague whispers are equally 
insufferable and unhelpful to the party. 

Impugnable Pride. Halaster views himself as 

something akin to a deity, and as such, has reached a point 
of pride that consumes many all-powerful beings. To sink 
down to a lesser foe's level is an insult to Halaster's ego. 
So, while he could very well crush enemies like the lich 
Ezzat, it's beneath him to try. Like all other near-
omnipotent beings, his is a game of cat-and-mouse. His 
minions, or the contestants of Dungeon of the Mad Mage
are pawns to be moved on a chessboard. 

Cursed Immortality. Many, even his apprentices, 

believe that Halaster's madness is owed to the Knot in the 
Weave, to Undermountain. The truth is far more tragic: 
the Mad Mage cannot ever die—and he knows it. The 
exalt he felt after his first rebirth is now just a bitter 
memory, a seed that has born strange fruit. This grim 
reality, of weathering all eternity, shattered Halaster's 
mind—and in the ruins of his sanity he has found comfort 
in madness. 

ATTACHMENTS
Somehow, despite all the years, despite his un-fettered 
madness, Halaster still has a heart—and it beats for a 
select few:

Tasselgryn Velldarn. Halaster has a soft spot for 

Skullport's most senior mage. He makes sure to visit 
Tasselgryn once per month. Adventurers might tempt 
their own doom by threatening her. When together, the 
two act like an old married couple. See Area 27 of 
Skullport for more information. 

Wyllow. Halaster has a complicated history with the 

archdruid of Wyllowwood. Given all he's done for her and 
to her, Wyllow can't hate the Mad Mage, and he himself 
can't even imagine a future without her in his dungeon—
and so he'll never let her go.

Apprentices. Somehow, Halaster still has a fondness for 

old apprentices, even if only out of nostalgia—actually, 
most certainly out of nostalgia because Halaster only 
begrudgingly tolerates his apprentices, and vice versa. 
Theirs is a relationship between a terribly misguided 
father and a handful of disappointing children. 

The Contestants. Despite plunging them into this horrid 

game, Halaster cherishes few others more than his 
beloved contestants. For them, he'll move the moon—or 
send it crashing down upon their heads. His idea of 
challenge is akin to a god pressing their thumb upon the 
world—walking the fine line between adversity and 
Armageddon. 

INTRODUCING THE MAD MAGE
We don't just hurl the Mad Mage at the contestants. 
Instead, we let Level 1, the Dungeon Level, speak for the 
cruelty and insanity that is its host. Neither do we just 
announce that the adventurers are the contestants of this 
season. The Mad Mage doesn't just appear and lay out the 
rules or declare them his unfortunate playthings—they 
merely learn that they already are, and never can they find 
the answer to the question of "Why us?" This, of course, 
comes later. 

The unknown is truly the scariest thing for the human 

mind to comprehend; therefore, you don't want to overdo 
it with Halaster's appearances. Foreshadowing, such as 
his booming laughter or his arcane eye, serve aplenty—
for Level 1, you ought to do your best to steer your players 
towards Area 27, the Hidden Demiplane. This should 
serve as your player's first encounter with the Mad Mage 
and a full conversation should be allowed to take place 
before the simulacrum melts away. 


5

HALASTER'S GOALS: REDEFINED
When running DotMM with Halaster's Game, these 
goals take precedence over what is written in 
DotMM's overview chapter. All are active, no matter 
how deranged Halaster might currently be, and are 
prioritized in the following order:

1. RATINGS, RATINGS, RATINGS
Halaster's foremost goal is to achieve the highest ratings 
possible on his interplanar program Dungeon of the Mad 
Mage. Even after dozens of seasons (each featuring a 
different adventuring party), the Mad Mage seeks to hone 
his craft. He will do whatever it takes to make a perfect 
season, short of performing a deus ex machina to save the 
contestants. 

Contestants would be shocked to learn that Halaster is 

actually rooting for them. Every season has ended in bitter 
disappointment and he needs a win. While he won't spare 
the adventurers, he does not go out of his way to destroy 
them—not until they finally arrive to his lair on L23. 

2. ONE WHO IS WORTHY
So seldom has a pupil impressed Halaster that he's always 
searching for the next—one who might even carry the 
mantle of "Mad Mage" one day. None of his current 
apprentices suffice, nor do any of the students of 
Dweomercore. No, Halaster's ideal apprentice is a 
contestant of Dungeon of the Mad Mage, one who bests 
him in combat. 

Halaster's prefers wizard characters as apprentices but 

will settle for (in this order) sorcerers, bards, and finally 
warlocks (whom he sees as "cheaters").

Ideally, this apprentice will prove their worth by besting 

his current apprentices (Arcturia, Trobriand, and Muiral) 
in combat, including the students in Dweomercore. 

3. EZZAT'S DESTRUCTION
As described in DotMM, Ezzat the lich has earned 
Halaster's ire. To battle the lich himself would mean 
lowering himself to the undead's level, and so the Mad 
Mage directs adventurers to destroy Ezzat. See L20.

4. WATERDEEP'S FALL
As written in DotMM, Halaster has entertained the idea of 
installing the Shadowdusks of L22 as puppets in control 
of Waterdeep—if only for the exercise of growing his 
influence or filming hit new gameshows. 

5. DEATH TO THE DROW
The Mad Mage can tolerate a great many of things and 
admires many more: desperation, tenacity, stubbornness 
in the face of adversity. What he cannot abide, however, 
is pride—and the drow houses Auvryndar and Freth are 
chock-full of it. His irritation has soured into loathing, and 
he views them as parasites encroaching upon his domain. 

Halaster would like nothing more than to see them felled 
by the lowest, meekest, most humble of creatures 
possible. Thus, it makes a fitting challenge to the 
contestants of Dungeon of the Mad Mage. 

6. PEACE (NEVER) IN OUR TIME
The githyanki crusade against the mind flayer colony of 
Seadeeps is an amusing debacle for Halaster. He often 
films the conflict, hoping to either make a spin-off to 
Dungeon of the Mad Mage or releasing a documentary. 
He doesn't know which yet. However, he fears the conflict 
spiraling out of control and ending too soon. He'd rather 
keep the conflict alive for years to come so as to have 
more material. However, he prioritizes the contestants' 
intervention, if they make it that far, and will not stop 
them from eliminating one side or the other.

7. A GLIMMER OF JHESIYRA
As written in DotMM, Halaster wonders over the 
whereabouts of his former apprentice. No changes are 
needed from the module. 

GAGS & GIMMICKS
What Halaster can do, both to the dungeon or to its 
inhabitants, is bound only by your imagination. The Mad 
Mage is conveniently omniscient, nearly omnipotent, and 
always has the contestants under surveillance—"filming" 
as he calls it. Often this takes the form of his arcane eye, 
as described under his Regional Effects, but can also 
include a scrying spell or other divinations. 

Spell List. While his list of prepared spells is already 

described in his statistics, Halaster can change it to fit 
whatever wizard spell you hope to use in the campaign. 
With literal eons of study, the Mad Mage has researched 
every wizard spell. 

DROPPING MONSTERS
Halaster can literally drop monsters on the party's heads. 
If he feels they're too smug, he can drop an ooze or two or 
teleport in a rampaging minotaur—or perhaps an angry 
flock of rabid geese. This method is great for interrupting 
any long rests the party might want to take in areas they 
shouldn't. 

Whenever you decide to drop monsters on the party, an 

illusion of Halaster appears nearby and rolls a twenty-
sided die. On a roll of 18 or above, this fickle torturer 
teleports a monster in. Roll a d10 to determine the 
monsters, consulting the Monster Drops chart. All 
creatures are low CR, as these encounters are meant only 
to vex the party. 

Don't overuse this gag. Not only will it grow tiresome 

for your players and slow down your game, but it pushes 
up the difficulty of an already dangerous dungeon.


6

The following encounters require more detail:
Howl of the "Werewolf." Halaster drops a commoner 

with 20 hit points heaped with layers of magic. Illusion 
magic paints the man as a werewolf and unleashes a 
lifelike howl. A spell of mirror image suggests that there 
are actually four of the beasts. For added theatrics, he's 
accompanied by a fog cloud spell that fills the chamber. 
The man is gagged and every movement is twisted by 
illusion magic to seem as if the "werewolf" is attacking. 
Creatures can discern the illusion with a successful DC 22 
Intelligence (Investigation) check. 

Minotaur Charge. Halaster casts passwall on a nearby 

wall, opening a passage from which a minotaur charges 
at the adventurers.

The Phase Web. The rift spits out a web (a sphere of 20 

feet in diameter) onto the adventurers. These characters 
must make a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw or be 
restrained (escape DC 12 Strength (Athletics)). The phase 
spider lairing in the web blinks with its eight eyes at its 
new prey and attacks.

Rat-Tat-Tat. A sudden grease spell discharges over the 

chamber, spraying several characters. Then, directly 
above some characters' heads, rifts form, each dropping a 
swarm of rats. Up to 1d4+2 swarms can be summoned 
by Halaster. 

Thinking with Portals. Halaster opens up a rift from 

which a creature makes an attack. The creature remains in 
the rift, only using its claws, fangs, or other appendages 
to attack. If it retreats 10 feet, the rift snaps close; if the 
creature grapples a character and the victim is pulled into 
the rift, the character appears in an environment typical of 
that creature (such as a marsh for a crocodile). The rift 
then snaps closed behind them. If the creature is slain, the 
character is shunted back to Undermountain. Roll a d100 
to determine the creature:
1-20. Saltwater crashes down above the party, dousing 

any light sources. A hunter shark lunges from the rift. 
If the shark takes 10 points of damage in one turn, it 
falls from the rift, which snaps shut behind it. 

21-40. A crocodile lunges from a marshland rift. 
41-50. The chamber is flooded with salt water while a 

giant octopus gropes at characters from beneath the 
Sea of Swords.

51-60. Mud and detritus explode from a rift in front of a 

character. The character must make a DC 14 Dexterity 
saving throw or be blinded until the start of its next turn. 
A giant toad makes a Bite attack, attempting to use its 
Swallow attack.

61-70. The rift is hidden behind an illusory wall or other 

object until a creature enters within 10 feet, after which 
2d4 + 1 apes hurl rocks (Rock attack) at the character. 
The illusion then shatters, revealing a floating rift with 
several simians 10 feet away from the rift on their side. 

MONSTER DROPS

d10 Encounter

1
Rat-Tat-Tat

2
1 psychic gray ooze hidden in gray mud

3
Minotaur Charge

4
1d4+1 smoke mephits

5
1 ravenous owlbear preferably during lunch

6
The Phase Web

7
1d4 rust monsters

8
Howl of the "Werewolf"

9
1 blood hawk with blur cast upon it

10
Thinking With Portals 

71-80. The rift opens upon a confused red dragon 

wyrmling's lair. It unleashes a Fire Breath attack before 
the rift snaps shut. 

81-95. The rift drops a sack seemingly bulging with coins 

and gemstones. The sack is actually a mimic.

96-100. A rift containing a roper forms 20 feet away from 

a character; the roper is 10 feet deep into the rift. It 
attempts to reel in a creature to devour. 

THE POINTS GAME
Halaster—that sadistic son of a bitch—has a penchant for 
violence and sick hilarity. He also has a near limitless 
supply of… well, supplies. Thus, he's invented the Points 
Game. 

Whenever one of the adventurers does something that 

pleases or displeases Halaster, he awards or subtracts an 
arbitrary number of points—which he informs the 
character of through telepathy. These points, he assures 
the adventurers, can be redeemed for both magical and 
mundane items, or spells cast upon the character or the 
area around them.

Ad Nauseum. Halaster can be quite stingy with the 

awarding of points. He doesn't tolerate copycats and 
quickly tires of a trick—so after punching the third ally, a 
character might find Halaster disapprovingly silent. The 
Mad Mage might also tire of the Points Game, reinstating 
it hours or even days later. 

Rewards. The value of an act is completely arbitrary, 

but the values of a reward are fixed. The price of a 
nonmagical item is 10 x its cost in gp with a minimum of 
100 points. When it comes to magical items, the price is 
determined by rarity: 250 for a Common item, and 500 for 
Uncommon. Halaster refuses to award anything rarer than 
that. Any magic item he awards that has charges on it is 
destroyed upon reaching 0 charges. If a magic item 
doesn't normally have charges, assume it has 1-3 or is 
consumed on use (such as a potion of healing).

Likewise, wizard spells of up to 2nd-level can be 

redeemed like knock or enlarge/reduce. 1st-level spells 
cost 300 points, and 2nd-level spells 500. This is often 
delivered in the form of a spell scroll. Halaster might also 
arbitrarily deny the adventurers a certain spell—i.e., 
leaving it up to your discretion. 


7

Rewarded Actions. Halaster often awards points for 

acts similar to these:
• Correctly answering a question telepathically posed by him or 

solving the riddle to one of his gates

• Humiliating, betraying, or hurting a dear ally
• Scoring a critical hit against a creature Halaster's indifferent 

towards or detests

• Feats of daring, including defying death
• Puns or other witty jokes
• Pulling off a cunning plan or tactic

Punished Actions. Halaster subtracts points for acts 

similar to these: 
• Incorrectly answering a question telepathically posed by him 

or failing to activate one of his gates

• Littering in Undermountain
• Sparing a foe of Halaster's

REGIONAL EFFECTS
In addition to the regional effects described in the 
Overview chapter of DotMM, Halaster can do any of the 
following:

Sentient Illusion. The Mad Mage sends a copy of 

himself, but not a simulacrum per se, to interact with the 
party. He can see and speak through this illusion or 
momentarily gift it enough autonomy and wit to speak 
with the adventurers while Halaster is busy with other 
work. The Mad Mage knows everything the illusion says, 
hears, sees, and does.

Bored Simulacrum. Halaster's madness manifests in a 

simulacrum (created as if by the simulacrum spell) which 
can harass the adventurers in nonlethal ways, such as 
casting wall of stone or hallucinatory terrain in their 
vicinity. The Mad Mage rarely becomes aware of a 
simulacrum but destroys it when he does, fearing that it 
might one day rival him. 

Disembodied Narrator. Whenever you want to speak to 

your players through Halaster ("That went well" or "Are 
you sure?") you can have the Mad Mage telepathically 
communicate to the party without blowing their cover or 
revealing their presence to other creatures nearby by 
verbally shouting across Undermountain. 

Chaotic Combatant. Halaster can randomly show up 

during combat and use his magic for hilariously, 
horrifying results—petrifying a goblin, wrenching and 
animating the skeleton from a slain bugbear (thus, adding 
a skeleton to the encounter). So powerful is the Mad 
Mage that he has no initiative and no spells to be bound 
by—he's bound only by your imagination. 

The Impenetrable Dark. A favorite antic of Halaster's 

is to curse a character with Darkvision to a life without it, 
to a normal human's sight. A spell of remove curse can 
restore a character's Darkvision trait, otherwise it returns 
whenever Halaster has grown tired of his prank. 

Sudden Conjurations. Halaster shunts the contestants 

into a demiplane stocked with whatever challenges or 
horrors he has in mind or teleports them elsewhere. If you 
want to insert a one-shot, especially any of the additional 
adventures written for DotMM by other authors, this is an 
ideal method to introducing it. 

Shadow Assassin. Halaster targets a creature which 

must make a DC 16 Charisma saving throw. On a failure, 
its shadow animates into a shadow assassin (see DotMM
Appendix A), which attacks its owner. If destroyed, the 
owner regains its shadow.

DUNGEON OF THE MAD MAGE
The following sections apply directly to Halaster's 
gameshow, Dungeon of the Mad Mage, which is, 
apparently, watched by countless viewers across the 
multiverse, if you'd believe Halaster. These aspects apply 
regardless of the level of Undermountain the adventurers 
are currently on.

Halaster's rules for the game are brutally simple, which 

he can explain as early as the adventurers finding Area 27 
of Level 1, the Hidden Demiplane. Otherwise, he can 
appear at your discretion starting on Level 2 or later. 

Excursions. Halaster promises the adventurers that, 

should they leave Undermountain for more than a week, 
he will forcefully teleport each back to L1. 

Losing. The only way to lose Halaster's game is to die—

and if all party members, original or otherwise, fall, then 
a new season of Dungeon of the Mad Mage will follow—
perhaps years or even decades later. 

Winning. Halaster leaves the winning condition 

intentionally vague, leading the adventurers to believe 
they just have to reach his lair on the twenty-third level of 
Undermountain. When they get there, however, it 
becomes clear that freedom can only be won by killing 
the Mad Mage—for Halaster tells them that "next season, 
I'll make it harder for you."

The Prize. Halaster promises the contestants a wish 

spell. This bargain is kept even after the adventurers 
realize they must kill Halaster. When reduced to 0 hit 
points, Halaster halts time. His wounds temporarily 
staunched, the Mad Mage honors his promise, hears the 
contestants' desire, and casts wish once.  

Forever and Ever. Even if the adventurers slay 

Halaster, the Mad Mage cannot die. When he reforms 
1d10 days later, he sets about bringing back the 
adventurers to his lair and fighting them—again, and 
again, and again. These "winners" will find themselves 
forever trapped in a vicious cycle until all are dead and 
gone—for at long last has the Mad Mage found his match. 
Only a wish spell can cause the Mad Mage to forget his 
vendetta. 


8

THEME SONGS
No show is complete without a catchy theme song, and 
Halaster's Dungeon of the Mad Mage is no different. 
Several suggestions are outlined above.

You don't want to play the theme song at the very start 

of your campaign. Your players should explore much of 
Level 1 without knowing they're the newest contestants in 
Halaster's game. Only use it when they finish Level 1 and 
begin their descent to Level 2, adding it in the Send-Off 
described at the end of Chapter 1 of the Companion. 

Afterwards, it's suggested you play your theme song in 

the following scenarios:
Opening Credits. Kick off your gaming session with your 

preferred theme song, preferably mixing in a recap of 
what happened last session.

The Mage Looms. Whenever Halaster is nearby, 

"filming" them or just engaging in his patented 
tomfoolery, you can play a bit of the music. It's 
guaranteed to put your players on edge. 

End Credits. Cap off your session by playing the theme 

song, preferably while narrating the epilogue Send-Offs 
included in each chapter of the Companion. 

THIS WEEK'S DUNGEON PROFILE
Whenever you take a break or return from one at your 
table, you can sneak in a "Dungeon Profile"
to 

foreshadow or shed light on a major character of DotMM. 
Each profile comes with a narration for you to read to your 
players, giving them an idea of what they face. However, 
many characters, or details thereof, have been omitted so 
as to not ruin the suspense or spoil a secret, such as the 
aboleth Illuun (see Level 4) or the Shadowdusk family 
(Level 22). 

All profiles are written by Halaster but voiced by a posh 

and professional man—although this is just secretly 
Halaster with a spell upon him to change his voice. As it 
becomes apparent in some profiles, Halaster lies, twists 
the truth, or lets his bias and temper get the better of him. 

Roll a d10 to determine this week's profile and 

announce, "And now, this week's dungeon profile!" 

DUNGEON PROFILES
d10Character
d10Character

1 Arcturia
6 Player Character

2 Trobriand
7 Ezzat

3 Vanrak Moonstar
8 Muiral

4 Vlonwelv Auvryndar
9 Jhesiyra Kestellharp

5 Tasselgryn Velldarn
10 Sundeth 

HALASTER'S TOP 10
Rank Song & Artist

1
Apocalyptica's Hall of the Mountain King

2
Blues Saraceno's Run On For a Long Time

3
Ennio Morricone's Rabbia E Tarantella

4
The Cosby Show's theme song.

5
Blondie's One Way or Another

6
Benny Goodman's Sing, Sing, Sing

7
DJ Day's Four Hills

8
Seatbelt's Tank! (Cowboy Bebop theme)

9
Ousiodes' Arcadia

10
Gary Jules' Mad World

1. Best described as sinister yet whimsical
2. Imagined as the adventurers constantly fleeing Halaster's 
wrath or monsters
3. Tense and explosive
4. Nonsensical, upbeat, whimsical 
5. Really epitomizes their relationship with Halaster, doesn't it?
6. Jazz with a hint of cynicism
7. Provides a well-needed warning: never, never die 
8. High tense jazz, perfect montage music
9. A melodic power metal song, if your players are into that 
10. Paints Undermountain as a place of perpetual sorrow, its 
residents unable to escape the Mad Mage's antics

ARCTURIA
A vision visits your mind, showing a stunning woman 
with gossamer wings and bone spurs jutting from her 
forearms. Azure scales line her flesh and she wears a
gown of cream and gold. Something about her seems… 
less than alive. 

"Arcturia," booms a voice, "arguably the most powerful 

of the Mad Mage's original seven apprentices. Eons have 
passed and death has yet to claim Arcturia. Lichdom has 
been her reward, and through intensive transmutations, 
she has reversed her deterioration into a corpse. Vanity 
and whimsey have always been her vices and not even 
undeath could deprive her of that beauty and wonder."

You hear music. A harp. This Arcturia woman, this 

blue-scaled butterfly of a woman, dances lithely while 
animal-headed servants watch. That's right. Servants with 
the bodies of men but the heads of beasts: a moth, a dingo, 
a stork, and much, much worse. When will this vision 
end? you wonder, pray. 
One of the original Seven and now a lich, Arcturia has 
altered her form so much she hardly appears human, let 
alone undead. See Level 14 & 23. 

EZZAT
You see the image of a hooded skeleton whose eyes brim 
with blue fire. In his bony hand is a locked tome.

"Damned Ezzat," a voice whispers, "A blight upon this 

mountain, this world. The impotent gods dare not strike 
him down, but a hero might come to turn this lich to ash."  
Ezzat the lich has been a thorn in Halaster's side for 
ages—but it's beneath him to face Ezzat himself. See 
Level 20 & Halaster's Goals for more details. 


9

JHESIYRA KESTELLHARP
Music floats into your mind: a sorrowful score performed 
on piano. Darkness clouds your vision before giving way 
to a portrait of a plain woman dressed in yellow-and-blue 
robes. Her face betrays the subtlest hint of a smile.

"Oh, Jhesiyra," a voice murmurs. "Where could you 

have gone, my darling, precious pupil, Jhesiyra? Why 
would you forsake us? Why? Why? Answer! Answer me!"

Your world trembles as the voice twists with spite and 

rage. "Then go! Go, wench! Begone, treacherous cur!"

The rasp of steel against a scabbard rings through you. 

A blade comes crashing down on the portrait of Jhesiyra. 
Your very blood! It sings! It rages! You fall to your knees, 
hands clasped about your eyes as the darkness takes you 
away from this scene of betrayal and heartbreak. 
Jhesiyra abandoned her mortal form long ago but yet still 
haunts Undermountain, hoping to seize it from her former 
master, the Mad Mage himself. To this day, Halaster 
wonders where she went—and his heart burns with scorn 
at the implication that he could be forsaken by a student. 
See "Undermountain Secrets" in the Undermountain 
Overview of DotMM.

MUIRAL
An image plays across your mind: an abomination with 
the torso of a man and the body of a scorpion wields a 
gleaming greatsword in its grip. 

"Muiral the Misshapen," booms a voice within your 

skull. "Bodyguard and later apprentice to the Mad Mage. 
His descent to madness ended in this grotesque form. His 
Gauntlet in the bowels of Undermountain have claimed 
many a soul—and his magics many a body as undead. 
And now the drow are at his door, carving away his 
kingdom piece by piece. Oh, poor, poor Muiral. 
Godforsaken fool. Tragedy is his to wallow in."
This monstrosity haunts L10—appropriately named 
Muiral's Gauntlet. See L10 for more details & Apx. A for 
his statistics.

PLAYER CHARACTERS 
These profiles are scathingly written by the Mad Mage, 
who has already dug up the character's most embarrassing 
or darkest secrets through divination magic. The point is 
to taunt, mock, and enrage the character. Tailor them to 
your players, drawing on their backstory, especially their 
past mistakes or deepest regrets. 

SUNDETH
The visage of a half-ogre astride a wyvern blazes across 
your minds. Over a subterranean harbor they fly while a 
voice booms, "Sundeth, the tyrant of Skullport. The 
Xanathar Guild has ordained his reign and all the Port of 
Shadow cries out for freedom! Will none stand boldly 
against this crimson king?"

The half-ogre champion rules over the Port of Shadows 
from the fortress of Skull Island. While he has little 
bearing on the campaign, the adventurers may seek to 
topple Sundeth's reign, especially if they're motivated by 
the Harper and Zhentarim agents in Skullport. 

TASSELGRYN VELLDARN
The image of a wizened old crone sipping tea in a shop 
stuffed with scrolls, tomes, and other minutiae consumes 
your mind. A voice narrates, "Tasselgryn Velldarn, 
Skullport's most respected magus. Those in need of a spell 
scroll or a message sent back to the surface will be fond 
customers of her services.

"Magus Velldarn also offers teleportation back to the 

surface. Go on, go solicit her services. Watch how far you 
can get away, my dearest contestants—see how far you 
can run before I wring your gods-damned little, brittle 
necks—"

The narrator coughs embarrassingly and continues, in a 

soberer voice, "Ahem. Customers should seek out Magus 
Velldarn's services at The Poisoned Quill of Skullport."
This archmage is a dear friend of Halaster's. Her shop, 
The Poisoned Quill, specializes in spell scrolls and 
sending spells. She can also teleport customers to 
Waterdeep for 50 gp a head. See the Skullport chapter for 
more details. 

TROBRIAND
The image of an iron golem fitted with a steel skull flits 
across your mind. Its movements are too human-like to be 
written off as a construct. 

"Trobriand: always the tinker of the Mad Mage's 

apprentices," a voice narrates. "Since his youth he has 
sought to combine metallurgy with magic, to escape the 
mortal coil, to create perfection. Undermountain is 
haunted by his inventions, by mad machines desperate for 
any outlet to their torment.

"Trobriand is no different than the worst of his 

creations. Detesting the frailty of flesh, the Metal Mage 
forsook his godly-given form for the strength and 
incorrigibility of steel—but at what cost to his sanity?" 
The so-called Metal Mage comes in the form of an iron 
golem with spellcasting, and is one of Halaster's original 
seven apprentices. His fascination with metallurgy 
prompted him to transfer his spirit into a golem. See L13 
& L23 for more details. 


10

VANRAK MOONSTAR
Your mind reels, swims—you behold a stately portrait of 
a handsome lord. The brass plaque reads VANRAK 
MOONSTAR. The nobleman bears a coy smile… but the 
air swims with miasma and the portrait begins to age. The 
smirk hardens into a scowl as the bags grow beneath 
Vanrak's eyes. Laugh lines twist into crow's feet.

"May we all remember the dark fate of Lord Vanrak 

Moonstar," a voice booms. "Reluctant patriarch of House 
Moonstar and apostate of the goddess Selûne. Her scorn 
brought ruin to his household and for that he turned to 
Shar, the Lady of Loss. Hounded by his critics and 
persecuted by his siblings, Lord Vanrak led his followers 
to the safety of Undermountain where they would be 
warm in Shar's shadow. May Vanrak rest in peace, his 
legacy continued by the most devout of his followers 
centuries later."
Vanrak has long since died—to his own hand, no less—
but the evil he begat grows bolder by the day. See 
Vanrakdoom on Level 18 for more details. 

VLONWELV AUVRYNDAR
Perfume wafts up your nostrils and caresses the tender 
flesh behind your eyes. Are… you having a stroke?

"And this week's dungeon profile is," a voice narrates, 

"Vlonwelv Auvryndar, drow priestess of the demon 
goddess Lolth."

The image of a stunning dark elf whose eyes radiate 

hate fills your mind. Her eyes lock with yours as that 
voice continues, "Ambition drives Vlonwelv just like 
other noblewomen of drow society. Yet what she could 
not achieve in the Underdark, she aims to seize here in 
Undermountain. Greedy temptress! Ravenous, fair-haired 
conqueror! Might she meet her red end soon, for from 
Muiral's Gauntlet in the bowels of Undermountain her 
forces march to take that which never belonged to them."
Vlonwelv, a drow priestess of Lolth, commands House 
Auvryndar from her stronghold on Level 10. The 
adventurers are on a collision course with her children 
starting with Level 3 of the dungeon. See Level 10 for 
more details on Vlonwelv. 

TRANSPLANAR ADVERTISEMENTS
Whenever you take a break at your tabletop, you can spice 
things up with any of the following advertisements. Roll 
a d100 and consult the table on the following page. 

1-50. These begin with, "This episode of Dungeon of 

the Mad Mage is brought to you by…" 

51-100. These begin with, "And now a word from our 

sponsors."

DUNGEON OVERVIEW

Dungeon of the Mad Mage is a whopping twenty-three 
chapters, each bulging with information. To comb 
through the entire book can take hours, and while each 
chapter begins with a nice summary of its content, there 
are still vital details buried in between room descriptions. 
Refer to this overview. 

THE DUNGEON IN SUMMARY
Undermountain is, like all the legends tell, utterly 
massive. It spans a mile of caverns and tunnels 
pockmarked by civilization and stocked with extra-planar 
horrors. The levels of Undermountain can be loosely 
divided into three categories, reflective of the Three 
Pillars of D&D:

Exploratory. Exploratory levels call back to the ancient 

days of dungeon-crawling that was D&D, which this 
entire module is an homage to. The areas of these levels 
have little story beyond a shared theme. The upper 
reaches of the dungeon are more exploratory in general. 

Narrative. Also described as "event-based" levels, 

these chapters of DotMM weave a story. The order in 
which areas are discovered matter little, and the 
adventurers are likely to backtrack to solve a quest or 
issue that bars them from progressing from the level. 

Combat. Sometimes existing as a middle ground 

between the first two categories, combat-oriented levels 
are expected to be hack-and-slash. Few areas can provide 
rest, and some are, more or less, trials put upon the party 
to overcome as soon as possible. 

LEVELS IN A SINGLE SENTENCE
The levels of Undermountain are summarized below:
1.
Haunted by monstrosities and a crew of bandits that extort 
passerby and picked clean over the years.

2.
Goblins carve out a meager mercantile life here amidst the 
bloody politics of the Xanathar Guild and a wererat gang 
led by a drow of House Auvryndar with Zhentarim 
sympathies.

3.
The drow of House Auvryndar wage war against the 
goblinoid Legion of Azrok for control over the dwarven 
ruins of Stromkuhldur and the River of Sargauth. 

4.
The River of the Depths feeds into a cavern infested with 
kuo-toa bedeviled by the aboleth Illuun. 

5.
The River of the Depths descends to Wyllowwood, a forest 
magically created by the Mad Mage for the archdruidess 
Wyllow; harming the woods or its animals guarantees her 
wrath.

6.
Duergar have raided a dwarven temple of the Melairkyn in 
search of riches.

7.
Stone giants cursed with magical amnesia are tormented by 
one jackass of a faerie dragon who lairs in the empty castle 
of the archmage Maddgoth, a serial killer of magi.

8.
Bullywugs under the iron heel of a death slaad wage a 
desperate war against spirit naga who use a rod of rulership
to enslave mortals.


11

TRANSPLANAR ADVERTISEMENTS
d100"This episode is brought to you by…"
d100"And now, a word from our sponsors:"

1-2 "Mimics—they're everywhere!"
51-52 "Close your eyes. Now open one. Drink Diet Cyclopsi."

3-4 "the Letter P and the Number 2."
53-54 "The Dragon Queen shall rise again. Hail Tiamat!"

5-6 Paethier's Pipeweed: Keep blazing, stay amazing!
55-56 "The druidess of Wyllowwood warns all: harm not lest ye be harmed."

7-8 "Hadar, arm of the Void: Phlanuf-bakh-atar!"
57-58 "Xanathar sends its regards."

9-10 "the Knights Who Say Nee: Nee."
59-60 "The Eye of Vecna has been stolen. Trust none. Pray to your gods."

11-12

"Texas Beholdem, the multiverse's premiere Poker tournament. 
Tickets are available now! Come for the cards, stay for the eye 
rays! Live audiences are subject to disintegration rays."

61-62

"Tomorrow night on Enter the Arena: Githyanki gish Elirdain squares 
off against the Sycophant of Ooze. Check out this stunning display of 
glory, guts, gore and more on Enter the Arena!"

13-14 "the Yawning Portal: Stop on by and have a brew as fools galore 

dip themselves into the horrors of Undermountain." 
63-64 "The Future Caretakers of Everything would like to remind you: plant 

a tree for once, you gods-damned fools!"

15-16

"the good folks at Garret Stone. Whenever I need good masonry 
done, I abduct those dwarves myself. Devoted little fools. They'll 
tunnel themselves to freedom in no time!"

65-66

"The Legion of Azrok needs you! The banners wave, and the trumpets 
call! Serve a cause greater than yourself and pledge your fealty to 
Warlord Azrok in the Ruins of Stromkuhldur!"

17-18

"the Ghaunadaur ooze-clerics of Undermountain: fhinala-pekta-
een-een-pa-pha! Paaa-pha! The Church of Ghaunadaur is not 
responsible for any caustic burns, mutations, or reduction to jelly 
matter that occur during or after baptism."

67-68

"Have you been victim to food poisoning or spontaneous combustion 
from a popular interplanar burger chain? Call us at Miller and 
Dreadnought for a free consultation. You have rights! Leverage them 
against the Fast Food Titans and make your voice be heard!"

19-20

"Handers, the world's finest personal assistant! With a ring of mage 
hand, you too can be diligently catered to by your own spectral 
servant! Handers can do everything: light a candle, unlock your 
door, cook your dinner, secretly transpose your most intimate 
conversations, and even play the harp! Order now!" 

69-70

"Lawsuits alleging Wolfburger Lord seeds its cuisine with subpar 
ingredients or evocation spells are simply unfounded—and to 
celebrate the settlement offer, Wolfburger is offering a 2-for-the-price 
of-1 deal, so come on in and enjoy a Wolfburger Deluxe at half the 
cost! Limited time offer only, maximum one party per transaction."

21-22

"the archdevil Baalzebub: Do your past failures yet haunt you? Do 
you hunger for your lost status? Do you crave redemption? Seek 
out your local cult liaison now! The past needs not be the future!"

71-72

"Dweomercore is accepting applications from all wizards and magi. 
If you have what it takes to study at Toril's premiere subterranean 
university, then, well, what are you waiting for?" 

23-24

"The archangels of Celestia: We would like to thank all the those
currently devoted to destroying evil everywhere. Remember, your 
excruciatingly painful death at the hands of evil will be nothing in 
comparison to the endless joys you will experience in Celestia."

73-74

"Need to get away for a bit? Need some excitement in your life? 
Ragetide Cruises are offering a sweepstakes give-away for a limited 
time only! Sign up and win your free cruise across the flaming seas of 
the Plane of Fire now! Treat yourself!"

25-26

"The Coalition of Material Planar Astronomers would like to warn 
you of the supermassive black hole developing just outside your 
star system. The worlds of Eberron, Oerth, Toril and Athas are 
advised to seek refuge on the Astral Plane immediately."

75-76

"Got a nemesis on his way? Curious to what the future holds? Are you 
suspicious of your beloved? Divinations need not cast an arm and an 
eye. Call us at Discount Divinations, where we'll provide answers for 
your deepest insecurities and raging paranoia."

27-28 "Walt Pixie Studios: Come see for yourself where magic and 

creativity are exploited for profit."
77-78 "Joseph Stein's hit new play, The Roper on the Roof has hit theaters 

across the multiverse! Reserve your tickets now, you philistine!"

29-30

"Miller and Dreadnought: Attorneys at Interplanar Law. Have you 
been kidnapped by a deranged archmage? Have you been subjected 
to an insidious game for a live audience? If so… Don't call us." 

79-80

"Adversity lurks around every corner. Welcome it. Conquer it. Never 
shy from adversity—meet its gaze and just do it. Undermountain 
Dew: do the Dew. 

31-32

The image of a satyr flashes across the characters' minds and a 
jubilant voice shouts, "Billy Mays here with my newest product: 
sausage! Staving off hunger has never been so easy. With this 
kobold sausage, you too can live nutritiously! But wait, there's—"

81-82

"Have you been experiencing memory loss? Confusion? Complete 
loss of a brain? Have you been seeing strange tentacled beings? You 
could have a mind flayer infestation! Call 1-800-GITHYANKI now 
for a free consultation. A Githyanki knight is already on its way!"

33-34 "Nobody! If you'd like to occupy this advertisement space, direct 

your sending spell to 10-14-79-18-DIV-20401E."
83-84 "Elvish Presley's new album That's the Way It Was is out now! Get 

your copy of the interplanar rock-sensation newest collection now!

35-36

"Justified, LLC." A heavy accent drawls, "Howdy there folks, we 
got us a ripe new bounty—a vagabond from the world of To-ril. 
Pretty hefty price too. Wanted dead or alive. Happy huntin!'" The 
visage of one of the adventurers blazes across the characters' 
minds with a listed reward of 10,000 gold pieces.

85-86

"Have you or a loved one been polymorphed, petrified, or enchanted 
by a law-flouting mage? Has your mailbox been turned into a rooster 
by a devious apprentice? Call us at Miller and Dreadnought for your 
free consultation. You have rights! Leverage them against these 
Arcane-wielding tricksters and ne'er-do-wells!"

37-38 "Mirt the Moneylender: There's no catch!"
87-88 "Shop at Gilmore's Glorious Goods: only on the world of Exandria!"

39-40 "The Tart but Polite Shadow That Shall Envelope You One Day." 89-90 "The Abyss is offering asylum to all refugees of interplanar war."

41-42 "the telepathic cranium rats watching from beneath your kitchen 

floorboards: 'We… Enjoy… You.'"
91-92 "Fans of Walt Whitdwarf, rejoice! Second Hand Publishing is 

reprinting the mythic poet's Blades of Brass. Get yours now!"

43-44 "Dissatisfaction—that slow and insidious infection that turns all 

joys, all dreams, to bitter ash. Its rot is already in you."
93-94 "Tired of waking up next to a stranger? Paranoid that your confidant

isn't who they say they are? Order the Doppelganger Detector now!"

45-46 "Your deep-seated and justified insecurities!"
95-96 "Ed's Adventure Emporium: Embark on your… 'Edventure…' today."

47-48 "Enter-flies: Got somewhere to go, but your broom or carpet is in 

the shop? Enter-flies' rental vehicles are just one call away!"
97-98 "Got a deadline and out of ideas? Try Muse Dust! Fast-acting and 

portable, no tools required but your nose! Find your muse today!"

49-50

"Brawlstate, the multiverse's most respected adventure-insurance 
company. Healing spells and resurrections don't come cheap. 
That's Brawlstate's stand. Are you in good hands?"

99-
100

"Attention! An extraplanar criminal has escaped justice! Be on the 
lookout for a gaunt human mage from the world of Toril!"
An image of Halaster's visage blazes across the characters' minds.


12

9.
Magi study arcane secrets under "Halaster's" tutelage; 
they're all tremendously awful people.

10. House Auvryndar's seat of power, carved from the domain 

of Muiral the Misshapen, a deranged and deformed 
apprentice of Halaster's.

11. House Auvryndar dukes it out against their rival, House 

Freth, for supremacy over Undermountain. 

12. House Freth tries to hold onto their territory against a tribe 

of minotaurs. 

13. Hobgoblins raid Trobriand's scrapyard for metal while a 

gnome mage uses these machines to create a duplicator 
machine.

14. Fire giants and hobgoblins work on a gundam ("Mecha-

Halaster") that the Mad Mage intends to loose upon 
Waterdeep one day.

15. The Mad Mage kicks back and relaxes while adventurers 

are terrorized by a death tyrant and a menagerie of traps. 

16. A portal links to an asteroid orbiting Toril from which 

Githyanki knights wage a crusade against the mind flayers 
infesting Undermountain.

17. A mind flayer colony, replete with a Matrix system, is 

defending against the Githyanki crusade. 

18. A cult of vampires devoted to the goddess Shar plot to 

attack the temples of Lanther and Selûne in Waterdeep; 
half the lair is melded into the Shadowfell due to a shadow 
dragon's growing despair. 

19. Ooze-worshipping priests have been cursed to gelatinous 

forms by Halaster; a stranded spacefaring crew desperately 
strive to survive; and two genies hurl adventurers at the lich 
Ezzat of Level 20.

20. Golems that worship Halaster as a god try to wrest control 

of the caverns from Ezzat, the lich, an enemy of the Mad 
Mage.

21. A planetar has fallen from grace and rules over these mines 

with an iron fist and a taste for violence.

22. Starspawn-worshipping cultists prepare for their bloody 

and triumphant return to Waterdeep.

23. The Mad Mage awaits the adventurers with his apprentices 

Trobriand and Arcturia.

INTERCONNECTED LEVELS
Much to its fault, Dungeon of the Mad Mage is divided 
into twenty-three levels with little connection to each 
other. It often feels like a "Villain of the Week" sort of 
plot—which makes sense if you run Halaster's Game, as 
it’s a gameshow. No matter how titanic the conclusion to 
the events on one level, it's neighbors will hardly be 
affected. It's not worth leafing through the entire book to 
figure out which levels are related to each other, because 
only a handful do, and it's because of the factions 
inhabiting those areas. See Factions of Undermountain 
below for more details. 

LEVEL CATEGORIES
LevelName
Category

1
Dungeon Level
Exploratory

2
The Arcane Chambers
Exploratory

3
The Sargauth Level
Exploratory/Narrative

3A
Skullport
Narrative

4
The Twisted Caverns
Combat

5
Wyllowwood
Narrative

6
The Lost Level
Exploratory/Narrative*

7
Maddgoth's Castle
Exploratory/Narrative*

8
Slitherswamp
Combat

9
Dweomercore
Narrative

10
Muiral's Gauntlet
Narrative/Combat

11
Troglodyte Warrens
Exploratory

12
Maze Level
Combat

13
Trobriand's Graveyard
Exploratory

14
Arcturiadoom
Combat

15
Obstacle Course
Combat

16
Crystal Labyrinth
Narrative

17
Seadeeps
Narrative

18
Vanrakdoom
Narrative

19
Caverns of Ooze
Exploratory

20
Runestone Caverns
Combat

21
Terminus Level
Narrative

22
Shadowdusk Hold
Narrative

23
Mad Wizard's Lair
Climax of the Campaign

* Altered in the Companion to achieve that theme

CUTTING LEVELS

Dungeon of the Mad Mage is a lengthy campaign no 
matter which why you slice it. Some levels fall short, 
while others amaze. If you're looking to trim away the fat, 
you might want to consider cutting the following levels or 
replacing them with other adventures written for the 
Expanded Dungeon. This is all, of course, a matter of 
opinion and a particular level listed here might actually 
jive with you. The Companion, for its part, tackles every 
level, aiming to polish or overhaul its content. 

Level 2. Unless you're interested in the fate of the Fine 
Fellows of Daggerford and the brutal vengeance wrought 
by the revenant found on Level 1, little occurs on this 
level, narratively. It's more of the same of Level 1, minus 
a few other variations. 

Level 6. Unless you have a dwarf or archaeologist 
character interested in the Melairkyn dwarves' legacy, the 
Lost Level has little life to it. The Companion expands on 
it heavily so as to make it worth your while. 

Level 7. Without the mage-killer himself (whose return 
is written into the Companion), Maddgoth's Castle is a 
worthless endeavor to run. Stone giants toil under magical 
amnesia while a faerie dragon torments them and a 
(mostly) empty castle serves as an optional detour. 

Level 13. Unless you can boil it down to a single 
session, Trobriand's Graveyard is a detour you can cut. It's 
only worth, without the expansion on it by the 
Companion, is foreshadowing Trobriand—but the 
apprentice only appears ten levels later, and your players 
are likely to have forgotten him by then.


13

STARTING AT A HIGHER LEVEL

Dungeon of the Mad Mage is a tempting sequel to other 
official adventures such as Curse of Strahd or Tomb of 
Annihilation—but such adventures end at 10th level, so 
how should this one by altered to fit that? The answer lies 
in Skullport, where the adventurers, perhaps years after 
their last caper, all wash up for reasons they don't 
comprehend… yet. Soon they all realize that the Mad 
Mage, impressed by their past endeavors, has selected 
them for his insidious game. 

Under this model, the party starts in Skullport, skips 
Levels 1-3, and begins their trek through L4, continuing 
with the adventure as written; the aboleth Illuun and the 
archdruid Wyllow are worthy antagonists if played right 
and backed up by stronger minions. L6-7 ought to then be 
skipped. Continue with the DotMM as written thereafter.

FACTIONS OF UNDERMOUNTAIN

The various factions of Undermountain fulfill otherwise-
empty roles in Dungeon of the Mad Mage. Without them, 
the adventurers are merely hacking through monsters. 
Two types of factions inhabit the dungeon: major and 
minor. However, there is no overarching faction in 
DotMM. Halaster is the only constant and, despite having 
a plethora of minions and apprentices, he and these agents 
can hardly be counted as a faction, for they don't make 
strides towards of Halaster's goals. 

Major. 

Major factions span several levels of the 
dungeon, wield significant influence, and rear their oft-
ugly heads at the most (in)opportune moments. 

Minor. 

Factions designated as "minor" are no less 
important or less powerful than major factions—they 
merely make fewer appearances in the adventure and are 
often confined to a single level, if not a single area. They 
still have a direct impact on that level's narrative but often 
cease to be important thereafter. 

DEATH'S HEAD PHALANX

Minor faction found on Levels 13 & 14

Led by the warlord Doomcrown, the Phalanx has taken to 
raiding Trobriand's Graveyard on Level 13 for scrap 
metal, which goes towards the construction of a 
gargantuan construct in the likeness of the Mad Mage. 
This "Mecha-Halaster" will one day be unleashed upon 
Waterdeep unless destroyed now. The warlord is the 
estranged son of Azrok of the L3 and has been exhibiting 
strange tendencies of late due to exposure to a flumph. 

Emberosa's Vision. 

Doomcrown unabashedly serves 
underneath Emberosa. The fire giantess desires to topple 
the Ordning and install fire giants as the leaders of both 
giantkind and the world itself. To that end, she and her kin 
can be counted as part of the Death's Head Phalanx 
faction, but as superior officers. They view the hobgoblins 
as tools to their mission—the loss of which is a minor 
inconvenience if something greater can be gained from 
the situation.

GITHYANKI KNIGHTS OF K'LIIR

Minor faction found in Level 16 & 17

Tracking the illithids of Seadeeps, the Githyanki have 
raided Undermountain and carved out a piece of territory 
of their own: the Crystalline Labyrinth. After discovering 
the portal linking Undermountain to Stardock, one of the 
hollowed-out asteroids of Toril, the gith moved the 
majority of their forces there to create a stronghold and 
creche (a place where their young can safely age and train 
outside of the Astral Plane). Githyanki are dogmatic 
militants that do not tolerate outsiders—especially ones 
so alien to their own biology. They're openly hostile to 
outsiders and meet the adventurers with force. 

Expansion. 

If you'd like to showcase the githyanki
earlier in the adventure, you can have a warband 
consisting of a githyanki gish and four githyanki 
warriors tracking a rogue mind flayer throughout 
Undermountain. As noted in the Skullport chapter (in 
both DotMM and the Companion), one illithid haunts 
Skullport. Rumors may reach the eager ears of the 
githyanki, who send the squad to investigate. 

GOBLIN BAZAAR

Minor faction found on Level 2

These goblins are one of the few possible friendly factions 
in Undermountain. They're eager to trade tools and food 
for gold. Yek, or any subsequent leader, hopes to establish 
a permanent and esteemed trading post. Such a dream can 
only be forged with gold and posterity. 

Aftermath. 

Should the adventurers pass by again 
(which is likely, as a Gate to Level 2 is right outside), they 
might find the bazaar dominated by the Xanathar Guild. 
This has two added benefits: if the party likes the goblins, 
they'll might intervene; and, if the Xanathar Guild has put 
out bounties on the party, it forces them to fight. 

HOUSE AUVRYNDAR

Major faction found on Levels 3, 4, 10 & 11

House Auvryndar appears early in the dungeon—and 
comes out swinging. The adventurers are likely to blunder 
into their web (pun-intended) as soon as they emerge upon 
L3. An outpost also dots Level 4, after which the drow 
disappear until L10. Led by Vlonwelv Auvryndar and her 
children, the drow seek to conquer the upper reaches of 
Undermountain, including Skullport. They're opposed by 
House Freth in the levels below their stronghold on L10. 

HOUSE FRETH

Major faction found on Levels 11 & 12

House Freth is certainly the more favorable of the two 
drow houses that the adventurers will encounter, if only 
for the fact that they weren't the first ones to terrorize the 
party. Under the leadership of Erelal Freth, the drow wage 
war against their cousins in the Troglodyte Warrens of 
L11. They're eager to find any advantage over their rivals 
and will seek alliances if the opportunity presents itself. 


14

HOUSE SHADOWDUSK

Minor faction found on Level 22

The penultimate threat of Undermountain and this 
campaign, the Shadowdusk family has been driven insane 
by constant exposure to the Far Realms. In their deep 
sanctum, these cultists dared to open a portal to that 
aberrant wasteland and in doing so brought doom upon 
their minds and family—doom that they've since 
welcomed. Led by the siblings Dezmyr and Zalthar, both 
death knights, House Shadowdusk plots their bloody and 
triumphant return to Waterdeep. A reckoning shall come 
to the ancient rivals that saw them ruined centuries ago 
and at long last will redemption finally be had—with the 
added spice of vengeance. 

House Shadowdusk, as puppets of Halaster, has the 
potential to be an overarching antagonist in DotMM, but, 
sadly, the module confines them to a single level, minus 
a few agents sent to L12 & L20. Such an overhaul would 
require encounters with them throughout the depths, often 
in the form of silent and distant watchers or inexplicable 
nests of greasy tentacles breathing loudly on a nearby wall 
(inside which lurks a single, bloodshot eyeball). 

LEGION OF AZROK

Minor faction found on Level 3

Led by the blind hobgoblin warlord, Azrok, the Legion is 
a goblinoid force under siege by House Auvryndar. In this 
conflict, they appear sympathetic, especially so when it 
becomes apparent that Azrok is honorable, even if vicious 
to his enemies or those that dare disrespect him. If the 
adventurers are instrumental in defeating House 
Auvryndar, they'll be hailed as heroes by the Legion and 
can find safe passage throughout its territories. 

SEADEEPS COLONY

Minor faction found on Level 17

Despite their enormous reach, the mind flayers of 
Seadeeps have been hemmed in by the githyank invaders. 
The bloody struggle has drawn out long enough to force 
the ulitharid, Extremiton, to breed a neothelid. While 
ordinarily, 
this 
colony 
could 
have 
widespread 
machinations, their ambitions have been blunted by the 
invasion. If the githyanki were to be eradicated, however, 
the colony would grow into a force of reckoning that 
could swallow Waterdeep. 

SHAR'S CULT

Minor faction found on Level 18 

The cult of Shar is led by a vampire cleric whose mortal 
cultists and vampire spawn plot to attack Waterdeep. 
Their two targets are the temples of Lathander and Selûne. 
The cult's lair is half-sunk into the Shadowfell, due to the 
growing despair of Umbraxakar, the shadow dragon. 
Freeing this leviathan is the quest objective of "Save the 
Dragon." See "Adventure Hooks," Ch. 1 in DotMM. 

Only if the adventurers attack the cult without finishing 
the job do they register on its radar. Otherwise, the cult is 
content to continue melding more of their lair into the 
Shadowfell while refining their plan to attack Waterdeep. 

THE XANATHAR GUILD

Major faction found on Levels 1-2 & Skullport

The Xanathar Guild dominates the upper reaches of 
Undermountain and hungers for more territory. The party 
inevitably comes into conflict with the Guild. 

Expansion. 

To keep the Guild relevant, Xanathar (or 
one of his lieutenants, such as Sundeth of Skullport) sends 
hitmen after the adventurers. Every two levels either an 
assassin appears or a crew consisting of a gazer, two 
beholder zombies, three goblins (who prefer shortbow 
attacks), two bugbears, three thugs, and a bandit 
captain finds the party. Inevitably, the Guild ascertains 
that the adventurers are too powerful to confront and 
batten down the hatches in Skullport and other territories 
in preparation for their return. 

Additionally, the Xanathar Guild is quick to claim 
territories that the adventurers already cleared, expanding 
from their outposts on Levels 1 and 2.

MAGIC ITEMS BY LEVEL

The following 
magic 
items 
can 
be found 
in 
Undermountain. Descriptions can be found in the 
Dungeon Master's Guide or in the level's respective 
chapter of the Companion. 

You'll notice that a bag of holding is not on these lists 
and a portable hole doesn't appear until Level 20—and 
for good reason. Negating carrying capacity severely 
trivializes the need to periodically return to the surface 
and ensures that the party will strip Undermountain of all 
its loot without difficulty. 

Level 1
• circlet of blasting (Wondrous Item, uncommon)
• driftglobe (Wondrous Item, uncommon)
• wand of secrets (Wand, uncommon)
Level 2
• circlet of human perfection (Wondrous Item, uncommon, 
requires attunement)

• dust of disappearance (Wondrous Item, uncommon)
• pot of awakening (Wondrous Item, common)
• potion of healing (Potion, common)
• ring of swimming (Ring, uncommon)
• spell scroll of raise dead (Scroll, rare)
Level 3
• elemental gem of water (Wondrous Item, uncommon)
• potion of animal friendship (Potion, uncommon)
• potion of healing (Potion, common)
• potion of water breathing (Potion, uncommon)
Skullport
• cloak of the manta ray (wondrous item, uncommon)


15

Level 4
• boots of elvenkind (Wondrous Item, uncommon; one boot, the 

other is on Level 5)

• pipe of smoke monsters (Wondrous Item, common)
• potion of healing x2 (Potion, common)
• rope of climbing (Wondrous Item, uncommon)
• spell scroll of gaseous form (Scroll, uncommon)
• spell scroll of magic weapon (Scroll, uncommon)
Level 5
• boots of elvenkind (Wondrous Item, uncommon; one boot, the 

other is on Level 4)

• hide armor of resistance to lightning (Armor (hide), rare, 

requires attunement)

• potion of gaseous form (Potion, rare)
• potion of greater healing (Potion, uncommon)
• spell scroll of heroes’ feast (Scroll, very rare)
• spell scroll of speak with animals (Scroll, common)
• staff of flowers (Staff, common)
• sword of sharpness, sentient, "Tearulai" (Weapon 

(longsword), very rare, requires attunement)

• wand of fireballs (Wand, rare, requires attunement by a 

spellcaster)

Level 6
• dagger of blindsight (Weapon (dagger), rare, requires 

attunement)

• sentinel shield (Armor (shield), uncommon)
• spell scroll of mass cure wounds (Scroll, rare)
Level 7
• elemental gem of air (Wondrous Item, uncommon)
• potion of fire breath (Potion, uncommon)
• potion of invisibility (Potion, very rare)
• spell scroll of cloudkill (Scroll, rare)
• wand of conducting (Wand, common)
Level 8
• candle of invocation, dedicated to Sseth, the neutral evil 

yuan-ti god (Wondrous Item, very rare, requires attunement)

• headband of intellect (Wondrous Item, uncommon, requires 

attunement)

• rod of rulership (Rod, rare, requires attunement)
• spell scroll of modify memory (Scroll, rare)
Level 9
• gem of seeing (Wondrous Item, rare, requires attunement)
• potion of greater healing x3 (Potion, uncommon)
• professor orb (Wondrous Item, rare)
• spell scroll of legend lore (Scroll, rare) 
Level 10
• chest of preserving (Wondrous Item, common)
• cloak of elvenkind (Wondrous Item, uncommon, requires 

attunement)

• gauntlets of ogre power (Wondrous Item, uncommon, 

requires attunement)

• mithral armor (Armor (plate), uncommon)
• oil of slipperiness (Potion, uncommon)
• potion of greater healing (Potion, uncommon)
• potion of healing (Potion, common)
• potion of superior healing (Potion, rare)
• spell scroll of hold person (Scroll, uncommon)
•  +1 wand of the war mage (Wand, uncommon, requires 

attunement by a spellcaster)

Level 11
• dagger of venom (Weapon (dagger), rare)
• dread helm (Wondrous Item, common)
• potion of supreme healing (Potion, very rare)
Level 12
• gloves of missile snaring (Wondrous Item, uncommon, 

requires attunement)

• horn of the Endless Maze (Wondrous Item, rare)
• potion of healing x2 (Potion, common)
• potion of vitality (Potion, very rare)
• spell scroll of telekinesis (Scroll, rare)
Level 13
• dodecahedron of doom (Wondrous Item, rare)

• Nolzur's marvelous pigments (Wondrous Item, very rare)

• orb of gonging (Wondrous Item, common)
• potion of diminution (Potion, rare)
• potion of longevity (Potion, very rare)
Level 14
• spell scroll of polymorph (Scroll, rare)
Level 15
• dwarven thrower (Weapon (warhammer), very rare, requires 

attunement by a dwarf)

• elemental gem of fire (Wondrous Item, uncommon)
• figurine of wondrous power, onyx dog (Wondrous Item, rare)
• necklace of fireballs (Wondrous Item, rare) 
• potion of greater healing (Potion, uncommon)
• potion of resistance (fire) (Potion, uncommon)
• wand of magic detection (Wand, uncommon)
Level 16
• manual of gainful exercise (Wondrous Item, very rare)
• potion of greater healing (Potion, uncommon)
• tome of clear thought (Wondrous Item, very rare)
Level 17
• potion of supreme healing (Potion, very rare) 
• potion of resistance (acid) (Potion, uncommon) 
• Quaal's feather token, tree (Wondrous Item, rare)
Level 18
• cloak of the bat (Wondrous Item, rare, requires attunement)
• mithral armor (Armor (chain shirt), uncommon) 
• sun blade (Weapon (longsword), rare, requires attunement)
Level 19
• boots of false tracks (Wondrous Item, common) 
• candle of the deep (Wondrous Item, common) 
• gem of brightness (Wondrous Item, uncommon) 
• mariner's armor (Armor (scale mail), uncommon) 
• orb of direction (Wondrous Item, common) 
• pole of angling (Wondrous Item, common) 
• potion of healing (Potion, common) 
• sending stone (Wondrous Item, uncommon)
Level 20
• amulet of proof against detection and location (Wondrous 

Item, uncommon, requires attunement)

• bead of force (Wondrous Item, rare)
• chime of opening (Wondrous Item, rare)
• portable hole (Wondrous Item, rare)
• potion of mind reading (Potion, rare)
• potion of resistance (force) (Potion, uncommon)
• potion of resistance (lightning) (Potion, uncommon)
• potion of superior healing (Potion, rare)


16

• ring of x-ray vision (Ring, rare, requires attunement)
• staff of frost (Staff, very rare, requires attunement by a druid, 

sorcerer, warlock, or wizard)

Level 21
• mace of smiting (Weapon (mace), rare)
Level 22
• black crystal tablet (Wondrous Item, legendary, requires 

attunement by a creature that has proficiency in the arcana 
skill)

• decanter of endless water (Wondrous Item, uncommon)
• ioun stone of insight (Wondrous Item, very rare, requires 

attunement)

• nine lives stealer (Weapon (longsword), very rare, requires 

attunement)

• potion of cloud giant strength (Potion, very rare)
• potion of invisibility (Potion, very rare)
• potion of supreme healing (Potion, very rare)
• spell scroll of flesh to stone (Scroll, very rare)
• staff of power (Staff, very rare, requires attunement by a 

sorcerer, warlock, or wizard)

Level 23
• helm of the Scavenger (Wondrous Item, legendary, requires 

attunement by a spellcaster) 

• horned ring (Ring, very rare, requires attunement)
• instrument of the bards, Anstruth harp (Wondrous Item, very 

rare, requires attunement by a bard)

• rod of lordly might (Rod, legendary, requires attunement)
• +3 shield (Armor (shield), very rare)
• Shield of the Uven Rune (Armor (shield), very rare, requires 

attunement)

• wand of wonder (Wand, rare, requires attunement by a 

spellcaster)

DUNGEON INHABITANTS
The following creatures inhabit Undermountain: more 
than 230 in all. The following creatures have been omitted 
from the following table:
• Creatures of CR 0 such as commoners and cats
• Creatures added by the Companion
• Creatures spawned by magic items (but not traps or 

spells mentioned in Dungeon of the Mad Mage)

• Possible creatures as a result of activating a polymorph 

trap on Level 14

• Various swarms of say, rats or spiders
Additionally, many creatures in DotMM have been 
altered from the creature they're based off of, such as a 
deformed experiment having the statistics of a cloud 
giant but with more hit points or a different type of 
attack. Refer to individual chapters for more 
information. 

HALASTER'S GATES
A whopping thirty-one pairs of gates dot Halaster's 
domain—and they're quite difficult to keep track of.

Gate Table. A summary of gates details its name, origin 

and termination, level requirement, and solution. 

Gate Map. A simple, color-coded map depicting the 

gates and their destinations has been included in the 
section following this one. 

Titled. Each gate has been named and numbered in the 

order of appearance throughout the adventure for you and 
your players' convenience. 

Cracking the Code. Each gate has a specific solution 

necessary to activating it. At your discretion, characters 
can attempt an Intelligence (Investigation) check to 
determine the solution rather than a legend lore spell. The 
DC equals 8 + the level requirement of the gate.

Level Requirements. As described in DotMM, 

Jhesiyra's 
disembodied 
presence 
warns 
off 
the 

adventurers from teleporting to levels they're not yet 
ready for and even bars them from progressing. You may 
be tempted to lift this restriction—and for good reason. 
After all, this is Undermountain. This dungeon has been 
advertised as one of the deadliest dungeons of the Sword 
Coast. It'd also be quite disappointing for the players to 
crack the code on a gate only to be denied entrance.

Descriptions. Generic descriptions of the gates have 

been written as narration blocks for your players. Any 
additional information pertinent to the gate has been 
included there. Gates are described in order of origin; use 
the same description for its pair. 

1. THE DUNGEON LEVEL

1. GATE OF THE ELDER WAND
Mounted upon the wall is a mirror whose stone frame is 
carved in the likeness of a wizard wielding a wand. The 
graffiti you saw earlier echoes inside your head: "Beyond 
the pillar forest, the Mad Mage waits, casting spells 
behind magic gates."

Perhaps this is the first of the Mad Mage's infamous 

gates, waiting for the special key or phrase necessary to 
hurl it open to whatever lies beyond. 

2. THE ARCANE CHAMBERS

2. GATE OF RAINING GOLD
Yet another of the Mad Mage's arcane gates: its stone 
frame is engraved with the image of raining coins and is 
that…? Aha! The keystone bears a small slot just barely 
out of your reach.

3. GATE OF THE GRAVEN TREE
An arched gate holds little interest—that is until you see 
the faint carving of a withered tree in its keystone.


17

DUNGEON INHABITANTS
Creature Name
Levels…
Creature Name
Levels…
Creature Name
Levels…
Creature Name
Levels…

aboleth
4
doppelganger
SP, 1
hobgoblin captain
3, 13, 14
pseudodragon
20

abominable yeti
18
drider
3, 4
hobgoblin warlord 
3, 13, 14
quadrone
2, 13, 15

adult blue dracolich
22
drow
2-4, 10-12
homunculus 
7
quaggoth
2-4, 12, 20

adult bronze dragon
(shadow dragon)
18
drow elite warrior
2-4, 8, 10-12
hook horror
4, 10, 14
quaggoth spore 
servant 
20

adult red dragon
16
drow house captain
10
hydra
8
Quasit
2, 4, 10, 14

adult silver dragon
21
drow mage
2-4, 9-12, 14-15 ice devil
15
rakshasa
14

adult white dragon
15
drow priestess of 
Lolth
3, 4, 10-12
incubi
12
red dragon wyrmling 16

air elemental 
1
duergar
SP, 6, 8, 14, 
17, 20, 21
intellect devourer
1-3, 17
remorhaz 
21

animated armor 
14
efreeti
9
invisible stalker
6, 23
revenant
1

arcanaloth 
9, 21
empyrean
23
iron golem
21, 23
Roper
4, 7, 15

archdruid 
5
ettercap
5
kenku
2
rust monster
2, 13

archmage 
SP, 7, 9, 12-
13, 20-23
ettin
1, 4, 17
kobold
SP
sahuagin baron
1

assassin 
8, 10, 12
faerie dragon
7
kuo-toa
SP, 4
scaladar
13, 17, 23

awakened tree
4, 7
fire elemental
6, 14, 21
kuo-toa archpriest
4
Scout
2

azer
13
flameskull
SP, 2, 23
kuo-toa whip
4
sea hag
SP, 3

bandit
1
flesh golem
1, 2, 8, 9, 23
lava children
13, 15
Shadow
1, 3, 18

bandit captain
1
flumph
14, 17
lich
20, 23
shadow assassin
18

banshee
10
flying sword
2, 6, 7
lizardfolk
2
shadow demon
11, 14

barbed devil
9
fomorian 
21
mage
SP, 2-4, 7-9, 
12, 14, 15
shambling mound
8, 10

barlgura
3, 6, 12
galeb duhr
19
magma mephit
15
shield guardian
1, 9, 13

basilisk
5
gargoyle
SP, 19-20
manticore
1
skeleton
3, 10, 15

behir
11
gas spore
3, 14, 19
marid
19
slaad tadpole
9

beholder 
20
gelatinous cube
1, 2, 14, 15
marilith
20, 21
smoke mephit
14

beholder zombie
2, 3, 21
ghast
2
medusa
19
spectator
SP, 9

berserker
2
ghost
3, 8, 10, 15
mezzoloth
2, 9
Specter
2, 10

black bear 
5, 7
ghoul
2, 10
mimic
1, 2, 5, 23
spirit naga
8

black pudding
1, 19
giant badger
2, 13
mind flayer
2-3, 9, 16-17
Spy
SP, 1

blue slaad
9
giant bat
5, 7
minotaur
SP, 12
Stirge
1, 11

boar
2, 5
giant centipede
1, 20
minotaur skeleton 
3, 8, 12
stone giant
7

bone devil
9
giant crab
3
mud mephit
19
stone golem
9, 10, 15 16, 
20

bone naga
8
giant frog
8
Muiral
10
swarm of bats
18

bore worm
13
giant lizard
10, 12
mule
6
swarm of insects
2, 8, 10, 11

brown bear
5
giant rat
1
mummy
20
Thug
SP, 2

bugbear
SP, 1-3
giant spider
SP, 2-5, 10, 12 mummy lord
20
troglodyte
2-4, 10-12, 17

bulette 
6
giant toad
5, 8
myconid adult
20
Troll
1, 8, 11

bullywug
2, 8
giant wasp
5, 13
myconid sovereign
13, 20
ulitharid
17

carrion crawler
1, 4, 8, 14
gibbering mouther
2
myconid sprout
20
ultroloth
21, 23

champion
SP, 2, 10, 15, 
18, 21-23
githyanki gish
16
nalfeshnee 
14, 19
umber hulk
6, 14

chasme
11
githyanki knight
16, 17
neothelid
17
vampire
15, 18, 20

chimera
3, 5, 14
githyanki warrior
16, 17
night hag
9
vampire spawn
18

chuul
4
githzerai zerth
15, 16
noble
17
Veteran
17

clay golem
6
glabrezu
6
nothic 
2, 9, 20, 22
Vrock
6, 12

cloaker
5, 6, 9, 18
goblin
1-3, 9, 12
nycaloth
7, 9, 15, 21
water weird
9

cloud giant
10
goblin boss
3
ochre jelly
2
werebat
5

constrictor snake
2
gorgon
14, 21
ogre 
14
Wererat
SP, 1, 2

couatl
22
gray ooze
1, 10, 19
ogre zombie
9
Wight
8

cult fanatic
18
gray slaad
6, 7, 19, 22
oni
3, 9
will-o'-wisp 
3, 5, 9, 12, 22

cultist
18
green slaad
4
orc war chief
2
worg
3

dao
19
grell
1, 9, 20, 22
orog
17, 19
wraith
10, 18, 22

darkmantle
4
grick
1, 2, 3
otyugh
3, 21
wyvern
SP, 9, 14

death dog
13, 14
grick alpha
1, 22
owlbear
2
xorn
3, 4, 6, 21

death knight
22
grimlock
3, 17
phase spider
3, 10
yochlol
10, 12

death slaad
8, 22
Halaster Blackcloak
23
piercer
4, 11
young blue dragon
14

death tyrant
15
hell hound
14
pit fiend
23
young green dragon
5

demilich
4
helmed horror
6, 9, 23
planetar
21
young red dragon
16

deva
23
hezrou
6, 11
polar bear
7
yuan-ti abomination
8

displacer beast
5
hobgoblin
3, 13, 14
priest
2, 10
zombie
3, 10-11, 15, 22


18

HALASTER'S GATES
# Name
Origin TerminationLevelSolution

1 Gate of the Elder Wand
L1, 26D
L10 Area 8
11th The gate is touched with a magic wand with at least 1 charge remaining.

2 Gate of Raining Gold
L2, 5
L4 Area 11C
8th A gold coin is fed into the coin slot.

3 Gate of the Graven Tree
L2, 12
L5 Area 13B
8th The gate is touched with a dead twig or branch. 

4 Gate of the Rusted Maw
L2, 20C
L6 Area 24
9th The gate is touched with a nonmagical item made of ferrous metal, 

such as iron. The item is then reduced to powder and the gate opens. 

5 Gate of the Elder Staff
L3, 15B
L5 Area 6I
8th The gate is tapped thrice by a staff of any kind. 

6 Gate of the Golden Wyrmling
L3, 21P
L6 Area 36C
9th A gemstone worth at least 100 gp is placed in the dragon's mouth, 

which animates and consumes the gemstone, destroying it. 

7 Gate of the Moonlit Mountain
L4, 10
L6 Area 27
9th The horn of the unicorn is inserted into the moon symbol. 

8 Gate of Dancing Dwarves
L5, 9
L6 Area 10
9th An interpretive dance replicating the dwarves, which takes 1 minute 

to perform. 

9 Gate of Floating Fiends
L6, 8B
L9 Area 13B
10th A creature flies or levitates within 5 feet.

10 Gate of the Blind Gazer
L6, 16
L10 Area 4B
11th An invisible creature stands before the mirror. 

11 Gate of the Amber Flagon
L6, 34A
L12 Area 9D
12th A pint of any liquid is poured on the floor within 5 feet of the gate. 

12 Gate of the Penitent Dwarf
L6, 34B
L8 Area 3
10th The key originally held by Rizzeryl on Level 2 must be inserted into 

the keyhole.

13 Gate of the Runic Palm
L6, 40
L11 Area 2B
11th Casting the mage hand cantrip and pressing its spectral fingers into 

the indentation for 1 minute.

14 Gate of Prancing Goblins
L6, 47A
L13 Area 7B
12th A creature sings a D note or plays a D note on a musical instrument. 

15 Gate of the Forbidden Lovers
L6, 47A
L18 Area 6
15th A silence spell includes the arch in its area.

16 Gate of the Riddled Sky
L7, 22
L9 Area 42
10th The riddle's answer ("O") is said aloud. 

17 Gate of the Raging Torch
L7, 29
L11 Area 16
11th A lit torch is brought within 5 feet of the gate. 

18 Gate of Tuoyaw
L7, 41
L10 Area 14D 11th A character speaks the words, "Way out!" while pointing at the gate.

19 Gate of Interwoven Gears
L8, 17C L10 Area 25B 11th The correct gear is popped into place, which is noticed with a DC 15 

Wisdom (Perception) check.

20 Gate of the Crystal Crown
L8, 18B L11 Area 11A 11th A character wears King Melair's crystal crown within 5 feet of the 

gate (found in Level 6, 11D). 

21 Gate of the Open Tome
L9, 49
L14 Area 25
13th An open book is held within 5 feet of the gate, which then 

disintegrates. 

22 Gate of Felled Explorers
L10, 11E L12 Area 6B
12th Speaking the command word ("Axallian") which can be learned by 

casting speak with dead on any of the skulls woven into the frame. 

23 Gate of Weeping Blood
L12, 8B
L19 Area 5B
15th A creature marked with a bloody X stands within 5 feet of the gate. 

24 Gate of Skeletal Minotaurs
L12, 12A L14 Area 2D
13th A creature targeted by the maze spell must become trapped then 

escape the maze.  

25 Gate of the Three 

Crossbowmen
L14, 39B
L17 Area 11
14th Three humanoids hold hands while standing within 5 feet of the gate. 

26 The Jigsaw Gate
L15, 15
L20 Area 9B
16th The magical jigsaw piece (revealed via detect magic or drawn on a 

d100 result of 1). 

27 Gate of the Gauntlet
L15, 24C L17 Area 7A
14th A six-fingered gauntlet, which can be found in Area 14B, Level 15, is 

touched to the gate. 

28 Gate of Soaring Drakes
L15, 30A L18 Area 16
15th A real, illusory, or artistic depiction of a dragon touches the gate. 

29 Gate of the Lone Arrow
L17, 8B
L19 Area 15
15th An arrow or crossbow bolt shot between the standing stones

30 The Crystalline Menhirs
L19, 7
L21 Area 23B 16th The command word ("Kelserath") is uttered, divulged by a sleeping

demon or legend lore spell.

31 Gate of the Mad Mage
L22, 35
L23 Area 1
17th A magic item of uncommon rarity or rarer is sacrificed

4. GATE OF THE RUSTED MAW
Another of the Mad Mage's gates beckons you forward, 
sparking that flame of curiosity deep in your gullet. 
Carved into the arch's keystone is a bug-like creature 
whose maw is stretched wide to devour a handful of nails.
Checks. A DC 14 Intelligence (Arcana) check confirms 
the creature to be a rust monster, the bane of dwarves 
everywhere. Dwarf characters instantly recognize the 
creature for what it is. 

3. THE SARGAUTH LEVEL

5. GATE OF THE ELDER STAFF
An arch gate going to who knows where greets you. The 
sneer of the Mad Mage echoes throughout your mind, 
drawing your eyes down to its base stones. An image of 
an old man clutching a staff has been carved into each on. 


19

6. GATE OF THE GOLDEN WYRMLING
The craftsmanship of this arch gate is impeccable. A 
dragon wyrmling's head has been carved from stone, its 
fanged mouth agape. Its eyes almost seem to glint with a 
voracious appetite.
Check. The dragon can be identified as the gold variety 
by its iconic whisker-like spines and the frills along its 
neck with a successful DC 14 Intelligence (Arcana) 
check. On a result of 16 or higher, a character recalls that 
gold dragons eat gemstones as food. 

4. THE TWISTED CAVERNS
The following gate terminates on this level; its pair has 
been described above. 
• Level 2, Gate #2, "Gate of Raining Gold"

7. GATE OF THE MOONLIT MOUNTAIN
You come across yet another of the Mad Mage's gates, 
this one more elaborate than the last. Six stone niches 
have been carved into the arch, each bearing a small stone 
figurine: a frilled drake, a frenzied owlbear, a manticore 
and minotaur, a unicorn, and some strange insect-like 
behemoth with a hunched back. 

The wall beside the gate has been detailed into an image 

of a swollen moon hanging high above a mountain. After 
close inspection, you find a small hole in the moon: a 
crater that recesses into the wall itself. 
Check. A DC 16 Intelligence (Arcana) check reveals the 
strange insect-like creature to be an umber hulk. 
Characters from the Underdark, such as drow, have 
advantage on the check.

5. WYLLOWWOOD
The following gates terminate on this level; each pair has 
been described above.
• Level 2, Gate #3, "Gate of the Graven Tree"
• Level 3, Gate #5, "Gate of the Elder Staff"

8. GATE OF DANCING DWARVES
You're unsurprised to find another of the Mad Mage's 
infamous gates. This one's arch bears an image of dancing 
dwarves, their arms crossed in a jig or spilling beer from 
their flagons, their heads thrown back in a guffaw. 

6. THE LOST LEVEL
The following gates terminate on this level; each pair has 
been described above. 
• Level 2, Gate #4, "Gate of the Rusted Maw"
• Level 3, Gate #6, "Gate of the Golden Wyrmling"
• Level 4, Gate #7, "Gate of the Moonlit Mountain"
• Level 5, Gate #8, "Gate of Dancing Dwarves"

9. GATE OF FLOATING FIENDS
This gate is… strange, to say the least. The arch is 
engraved with images of esoteric, floating creatures: a 
creature akin to a flying rat with a proboscis, a jellyfish-
like creature with eyeballs on its stalks, and a beholder. 

10. GATE OF THE BLIND GAZER
Legion lidless eyes stare out while you behold this gate. 
Engraved into the frame are the words, "THE GATE 
CANNOT HIDE FROM WHAT IT CANNOT SEE."

11. GATE OF THE AMBER FLAGON
Upon this gate, yet another of the many scattered across 
this godforsaken dungeon, lies an image of a flagon from 
which pours a rush of ale. 

12. GATE OF THE PENITENT DWARF
The Mad Mage is getting more creative, it seems. This 
gate bears a bas-relief—a bas-relief! It depicts a dwarf 
with her eyes shut tight. A hammer is held close to her 
chest and in the head of that hammer is a keyhole. 
Check. A character can open the gate without the stone 
key by using an action to pick the lock, requiring a 
successful DC 20 Dexterity check using thieves' tools. 

Consequences. On a failed check, the dwarf's eyes open 

and shoot forth beams of light. Each creature within 10 
feet of the arch must make a DC 16 Dexterity saving 
throw, taking 22 (4d10) radiant damage on a failed save, 
or half as much damage on a successful one. 

13. GATE OF RUNIC PALM
Another foul hour, another foul gate of Halaster's. 
Recessed into the arch's keystone is the shape of a hand. 
An arcane sigil is embossed upon the hand's palm. 

14. GATE OF PRANCING GOBLINS
Upon this arch gate you find the image of prancing 
goblins, jiving to an invisible, muted tune. The letter D 
has been engraved upon the keystone.  

15. GATE OF THE FORBIDDEN LOVERS
The voice of the Mad Mage blooms deep within your 
skulls as you lay your eyes on this arcane gate. On its arch 
are two scantily clad elves holding their fingers to their 
lips in a gesture of silence. 

"Ah, young love," the Mage whispers, "so foolish yet so 

necessary, and made all the sweeter if forbidden. Does it 
not take you back to those gold-lit, idyllic days?"

7. MADDGOTH'S CASTLE

16. GATE OF THE RIDDLED SKY
A riddle! This arcane gate bears a riddle—what a 
refreshing change of pace. "What appears," reads the 
inscription, "once in an hour, twice in a blue moon, and 
never in sunshine?"


20

17. GATE OF THE RAGING TORCH
You aren't even surprised to find one of Halaster's gates 
here. The keystone of this one depicts a hand clutching a 
lit torch whose fiery fingers reach upwards for the ceiling. 

18. GATE OF TUOYAW
You gaze upon a mirror and slowly realize it's one of 
Halaster's gods-damned gates—even here. Its frame is 
without decoration, but you can make out faint arcane 
sigils here and there. On the bottom of the frame, you see, 
are the letters, T-U-O-Y-A-W—perhaps some sort of god 
or ancient specter's name?

8. SLITHERSWAMP
The following gate terminates on this level; its pair has 
been described above. 
• Level 6, Gate #12, "Gate of the Penitent Dwarf"

19. GATE OF INTERWOVEN GEARS
Now this gate you can actually appreciate. It appeals to 
you in a way modern art never has. This arcane gate is 
imposed of hundreds of tiny, interlocking gears. You feel 
as if they all ought to be chirping or moving, so… What's 
the issue?

20. GATE OF THE CRYSTAL CROWN
Two pillars with a lintel form a standing gate: one of the 
Mad Mage's inscrutable portals linking the depths of 
Undermountain together. Chiseled into the lintel is a 
message in a rigid, unforgiving script. 
Language. The message reads "Don the Crystal Crown" 
in Dwarvish. 

9. DWEOMERCORE
The following gates terminate on this level; each pair has 
been described above. 
• Level 6, Gate #9, "Gate of Floating Fiends"
• Level 7, Gate #16, "Gate of the Riddled Sky"

21. GATE OF THE OPEN TOME
Another gate. You've grown tired of the sight. Still, you 
can't help but inspect this one. You find no tricks, no 
macabre decorations: only an image of an open tome 
engraved into its keystone. 

10. MUIRAL'S GAUNTLET
The following gates terminate on this level; each pair has 
been described above. 
• Level 1, Gate #1, "Gate of the Elder Wand"
• Level 6, Gate #10, "Gate of the Blind Gazer"
• Level 7, Gate #18, "Gate of Tuoyaw"
• Level 8, Gate #19, "Gate of the Interwoven Gears"

22. GATE OF FELLED EXPLORERS
This creation is most foul: a mirror whose stone frame has 
eleven humanoid skulls embedded into it. A flowing, 
slender script has been carved on the bottom of the frame.
Language. The message reads "The dead know the 
secret" in Celestial. 

11. TROGLODYTE WARRENS
The following gates terminate on this level; each pair has 
been described above. No gates originate on this level.
• Level 6, Gate #13, "Gate of the Runic Palm"
• Level 7, Gate #17, "Gate of the Raging Torcher "
• Level 8, Gate #20, "Gate of the Crystal Crown"

12. MAZE LEVEL
The following gates terminate on this level; each pair has 
been described above. 
• Level 6, Gate #11, "Gate of the Amber Flagon"
• Level 10, Gate #22, "Gate of Felled Explorers"

23. GATE OF WEEPING BLOOD
You smell that sickly sweet, iron scent in the air: blood. 
You come upon a pair of standing stones. Carved into the 
lintel is a crimson X… And when you approach, it begins 
to weep crimson. 

24. GATE OF SKELETAL MINOTAURS
Two stones stand stoically here and it's only when you 
spot the lintel connecting the two that you realize you've 
found another of the Mad Mage's gates. Frustrated, and 
feeling perhaps a little put-upon, you look for this one's 
catch… In the gloom you make out two horned skeletons 
embedded into each of the two standing stones. 
Check. The skeletons can be identified as minotaurs with 
a DC 12 Intelligence (Arcana) check.
13. TROBRIAND'S GRAVEYARD
The following gate terminates on this level; its pair has 
been described above. No gates originate on this level.
• Level 6, Gate #14, "Gate of Prancing Goblins"

14. ARCTURIADOOM
The following gates terminate on this level; each pair has 
been described above. 
• Level 9, Gate #21, "Gate of the Open Tome"
• Level 12, Gate #24, "Gate of the Skeletal Minotaur"

25. GATE OF THE THREE CROSSBOWMEN
Upon this arcane gate you find a primitive drawing: three 
human-like stick figures hold hands. Did a child decorate 
this gate? You wouldn't put it past the Mad Mage of 
abducting one for that purpose. Or for the mage's mind to 
devolve into child-like whimsy. 


21

15. OBSTACLE COURSE

26. THE JIGSAW GATE
This gate of the Mad Mage's is composed of countless 
stone jigsaw pieces, each bigger than your hand. The 
pieces seemingly fit perfectly—so why is the gate closed?
Consequences. If the wrong piece is removed, an adult 
white dragon appears and attacks 

27. GATE OF THE GAUNTLET
Alas, another arcane gate—those stone lice that infest this 
dungeon. This one's design is simple: carved into the 
arch's keystone is a gauntlet. A gauntlet with six fingers.

28. GATE OF SOARING DRAKES
You marvel at the beauty of the Mad Mage's arcane gate. 
Gold-inlaid images depict drakes soaring across the skies. 
Above the arch a message is written in a sharp script.
Language. The message reads, "Only a dragon can open 
this gate" in Draconic. 

16. CRYSTAL LABYRINTH
No gates are present on this level, save for the one which 
links the Crystal Labyrinth with Stardock. 

17. SEADEEPS
The following gates terminate on this level; each pair has 
been described above. 
• Level 14, Gate #25, "Gate of the Three Crossbowmen"
• Level 15, Gate #27, "Gate of the Six-Fingered Gauntlet"

29. GATE OF THE LONE ARROW
Yet another of the Mad Mage's arcane gates, this time 
formed between two standing stones whose lintel bears 
the carved symbol of a lone arrow. 

18. VANRAKDOOM
The following gates terminate on this level; each pair has 
been described above. No gates originate on this level.
• Level 6, Gate #15, "Gate of the Forbidden Lovers"
• Level 15, Gate #28, "Gate of the Soaring Drake"

19. CAVERNS OF OOZE
The following gates terminate on this level; each pair has 
been described above. 
• Level 12, Gate #23, "Gate of Weeping Blood"
• Level 17, Gate #29, "Gate of the Lone Arrow "

30. THE CRYSTALLINE MENHIRS
The crystalline menhirs stand stoically, patiently. Your 
mind whispers its omens to you. Something isn't right. 
Danger abounds, but neither you nor that scared little 
lizard at the back your skull can tell what or where it is. 

20. RUNESTONE CAVERNS
The following gate terminates on this level; its pair has 
been described above. No gates originate on this level.
• Level 15, Gate #26, "The Jigsaw Gate"

21. TERMINUS LEVEL
The following gate terminates on this level; its pair has 
been described above. No gates originate on this level.
• Level 19, Gate #30, "The Crystalline Menhirs"

22. SHADOWDUSK HOLD

31. GATE OF THE MAD MAGE
There it lies: the final gate of this madhouse. Its keystone 
is carved in the visage of Halaster Blackcloak himself and 
his eyes follow you as you approach.

Halaster's lips animate and demands, "Yield magic for 

safe passage!" A stone arm begins to rise from the floor, 
its palm open to accept tribute. "Yield or be stoned!"

23. MAD WIZARD'S LAIR
The following gate terminates on this level; its pair has 
been described above. No gates originate on this level.
• Level 22, Gate #31, "Gate of the Mad Mage"


22

16

22

23

12
13
11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2
1

14

15

17

18

19

20

21

LEGEND

requires 8th-level
requires 9th-level
requires 10th-level
requires 11th-level
requires 12th-level
requires 13th-level
requires 14th-level
requires 15th-level
requires 16th-level
requires 17th-level


23

THE DUNGEON FLESHED OUT
The aim of the Companion is to flesh out and expand upon 
DotMM's source material without dragging out your 
campaign. The following features apply to the entire 
dungeon. Use them at your discretion.  

WEAVE ADDICTION
The Knot in the Weave below Undermountain calls to 
those who remain in the Mad Mage's realm. It calls in 
their sleep, it calls in their very blood. Arcane spellcasters 
find it especially compelling to remain in the dungeon. 
Alas, there is no system in place to represent this addiction 
to the Knot in the Weave. Therefore, you can implement 
it in this manner:

Addiction. Every 24 hours a character spends in 

Undermountain, it must succeed on a Wisdom saving 
throw (the DC equals the current level dungeon they're 
on). Arcane spellcasters suffer a permanent     -2 to their 
saving throw. On a failure, a character gains one level of 
Weave Addiction, the effects of which are described 
below. These effects are cumulative. 

Reduction. To reduce weave addiction, a creature must 

remain outside Undermountain for 24 hours, after which 
they may repeat their Wisdom saving throw again. On a 
success, they reduce their Weave Addiction by one level. 

Vancian Magic. Magic is alive, as is the Knot in the 

Weave. A creature can be subjected to a spell of greater 
restoration to remove one level of Weave Addiction, but 
the caster must contend with the forces of the Knot itself. 
The caster must succeed on an ability check using their 
spellcasting ability (DC 3 + the current dungeon level + 
the level of Weave Addiction). Failing the check 
consumes both the spell slot and material components 
used and causes the spell to fail. 

Skullport. The ancient Netherese that settled beneath 

Undermountain could hear the call of the Knot. Knowing 
what sort of fate was in store, they placed wards upon 
their territory. To this day, this abjuration magic 
permeates 
Skullports. 
Creatures 
residing
there 

automatically succeed on their saving throw to resist 
addiction. A creature already afflicted with Weave 
Addiction, however, must still make its saving throws as 
normal. 

WEAVE ADDICTION
LevelEffect

1
Allure. You are charmed by Undermountain itself, as if 
by a charm person spell. Checks related to convincing 
you to return are made with advantage.

2
Disheveled. While outside Undermountain, you have 
disadvantage on ability checks.

3
Dissonance. Your thoughts are plagued by dreams of 
Undermountain. 
While 
outside 
it, 
you 
have 

disadvantage on saving throws. 

4
Withdrawal. You cannot gain the benefits of a long rest 
if you are not in Undermountain or within 1 mile the 
Yawning Portal of Waterdeep. 

5
Madness. You gain a form of indefinite madness, as
described in the Dungeon Master's Guide. 

6
Anathema. You dare not leave Undermountain, as if 
you were under a geas spell, which is triggered if you 
leave for or remain on the surface.  

ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS
Undermountain was already dangerous before Halaster 
reshaped it into his dungeon. Long before his arrival, the 
Melairkyn dwarves mined these depths for ore. Then 
came the wars with the drow and duergar, littering the 
depths with traps, corpses, rusty weapons, or other dark 
secrets of the conflict. The skeletons of these operations 
still 
remain 
to 
this 
day 
and, 
coupled 
with 

Undermountain's natural perils, make this place into a 
harrowing gauntlet. 

The following hazards are constant dangers to creatures 

who roam Undermountain. Many owe themselves to 
dwarven mining operations or the centuries of war waged 
by the drow and duergar. 

Blackdamp. Still air with a lethal absence of oxygen 

and an abundance of harmful gases, blackdamp has 
claimed many a miner. Creatures that pass through an 
extended area must hold their breath or begin to suffocate. 
Additionally, those that breathe in this foul air must make 
a DC 12 Constitution saving throw at the start of their turn 
or take 2d6 poison damage. After three failures, a creature 
is poisoned for 1 hour. 

Explosive Gas. Explosive gases pool underground and 

are often loosed from mining operations. An open flame 
(such as by a torch) can cause an explosion. Creatures 
within 20 feet must make a Dexterity saving throw or take 
force damage. A creature takes half damage on a success. 
The damage and DC is determined by the size of the gas 
cloud: Small (2d6, DC 12); Medium (4d6, DC 14); and 
Large (6d6, DC 16). In enclosed spaces, each explosion 
can also inflict 1d6 thunder damage. 

Smoke. Areas without proper ventilation accumulate 

smoke which can remain for years. Creatures that start 
their turn in these areas that aren't already holding their 
breath must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving 
throw or take 1d4 poison damage. They are then poisoned 
for 1 hour. 


24

Stray Metal. Mining structures, as well as abandoned 

tools or weapons (sometimes hidden underwater in 
flooded chambers) can imperil passerby. Creatures that 
are cut by this metal take slashing damage from 1 to 1d4, 
determined by the size or angle of the object. 

Nested Tentacles. In the depths of Undermountain, the 

Shadowdusk family has dared consort with the Far 
Realms. Their continued contact with that aberrant void 
has exposed Undermountain to its energies, causing 
tentacles to sprout from itinerant portals. When a creature 
is within 10 feet, the tentacle makes an attack against a 
creature (+6 to hit). On a hit, the creature is grappled 
(escape DC 14) and takes 1d6 psychic damage. The 
tentacle has 16 hit points and an AC of 14. Inside each 
nest is an eye.

OTHER ADVENTURING PARTIES
Undermountain can be pretty barren when it comes -to an 
honest-to-good-god conversation. While the many 
factions of the dungeon present social opportunities, they 
don't exactly make for good bedfellows. You can 
supplement this need with other adventuring parties, who 
pop up here and there throughout the campaign.

The parties included here can be inserted into your 

campaign—preferably before the party ever descends into 
the dungeon. Including other parties serves three 
purposes:

Loss of Life. Undermountain is strewn with corpses—

but that's the adventuring life, right? Bodies are 
everywhere, and therefore faceless. But if the adventurers 
know the corpse? That has impact.

Lawlessness. It's winner-takes-all in this cesspit. Men 

covet what their neighbors have to offer. Other parties 
could demand the players' coin or magic items, but really, 
when they've ventured too deep into Undermountain, the 
true treasure will be food, water, and lamp oil. Imagine a 
fracas fought over something as simple as a few strips of 
jerky.

It's Time to Go. Nothing screams, "Run!" more than a 

demonic spider snatching up a poor NPC and snapping his 
head off with its mandibles. By having disposable 
meatbags, you can broadcast the inherent danger of an 
area—and shock the party with the viscera.

FINE FELLOWS OF DAGGERFORD
The Fine Fellows are an evil adventuring party already 
included in DotMM and expanded on in Chapter 2 of the 
Companion. Unlike other sample adventuring parties, 
they should not be directly presented to the players before 
their descent into Undermountain, as their story begins a 
few days before the players'. Members can be 
encountered on Levels 1 and 2; they're expected to die at 
the hands of the revenant that is their murdered comrade.

The Fine Fellows of Daggerford consist of:

Rex the Hammer, a LE human champion that hungers 

for fame and fortune above all else. He founded and 
leads the Fine Fellows of Daggerford, carefully 
selecting its members—screening out the kind 
("foolish") and choosing only those that would tolerate 
the depravity he himself is willing to commit for a 
handful of silver.

Midna Tauberth, A human priestess of Shar cursed with 

pride. She's incapable of backing down from any 
challenge, even when she's outmatched. Kelim 
withholds which deity Midna follows, for Shar is 
ostensibly worshipped by those of dark alignments.

Halleth Garke, a N half-elf cleric of Waukeen. Halleth is 

obsessed with fair-shares. He complains whenever he 
feels slighted or excluded from anything. Despite 
having a sliver of good in him, his tolerance for 
debauchery is what damns him as an evil individual. By
when the party finds him, Halleth will have been 
murdered by his comrades and rise as a revenant on L1.

Copper Stormforge, a NE dwarven thief (scout) that 

covets all that glitters. Copper isn't one to shy away 
from cruelty. He's survived thus far by being one step 
ahead and never mistaking kindness as the right choice.

Kelim the Weasel, a NE human spy that looks out for 

himself above all else. An opportunist and a coward, 
Kelim hides behind others and slinks off when possible 
to advance himself in the world. 

THE CHEEKY PLUCKERS
The Cheeky Pluckers are two-bit adventuring party that 
the players are familiar with. The players encounter the 
Pluckers a day or two before they themselves descend into 
Undermountain. Generally, they can be considered allies 
of the players unless driven to desperate circumstances. 
They're willing to team up, share rations, and watch each 
other's backs. 

Ultimately, the Pluckers are doomed to die to the 

horrific rituals of T'rissa Auvryndar, the drow priestess
of Lolth of Level 3. Those that evaded capture, or didn't 
have a bowl of spiderlings erupt from their stomachs, are 
eventually picked up by Arcturia, the lich apprentice of 
Halaster. She's since visited Level 14 and altered the 
remaining Pluckers' forms until they can hardly be called 
human. 

The Cheeky Pluckers consist of:

Fiona dé Vaun, a LG knight. Boisterous and foolhardy, 

she serves as the Pluckers' leader. 

Four-Fingers, a N gnome bandit. His forefinger was 

chopped as penance for theft. The lesson didn't stick 
though, as his other hand can attest. 

Halberd, a LG reserved dwarf berserker armed with his 

family's gold-trimmed halberd. 

Sariel, a NE drow whose noble house was destroyed by 

House Auvryndar decades ago. She nurses a vendetta 
as if it were her own child. 

Daniel Elfman, a half-elf bard (see VGM) fond of the 

lyre and telling long-winded tales. 


25

THE GENTLEMEN BASTARDS
The Gentlemen Bastards a fine foil for your players. 
They're cautious opportunists who only enter fights 
they're sure they'll win. They're rivals that won't resort to 
bloodshed unless pressed—but if Grel, their leader, dies 
or disappears, Jocelyn pushes the Bastards towards more 
evil methods and attitudes. 

Ultimately, the Gentlemen Bastards are utilized in 

Chapter 8 of the Companion, on Level 8, when they're 
captured by the Ssethian Scourges. Before that, they can 
be encountered on several levels:
• Buying wares at the goblin bazaar on Level 2
• Drinking at The Flagon & the Dragon in Skullport
• Signs of the passage can be found in Wyllowwood
• Passing through the caverns of Level 7

The Gentlemen Bastards consist of:

Grel Momesk. A LN human champion, Grel seeks the 

riches necessary to lift his family out of poverty. He 
leads the Bastards, often to his own peril. The Bastards, 
for their part, tolerate his occasional mistakes and 
fragile temperament. 

Jocelyn of Daggerford. A NE human warlock of the 

archfey, Jocelyn serves the Queen of Air and Darkness. 
Hers is a quest to discover "the secrets" of 
Undermountain (namely, the Knot in the Weave). She 
was once a member of the Fine Fellows of Daggerford 
but was kicked out for being too "unsettling." When 
endangered but not yet attacked, she favors casting 
charm person as 5th-level spell so as to defuse the 
situation. 

Perlos. A NE halfling assassin, Perlos is a wanted man in 

Waterdeep, Baldur's Gate, and Neverwinter. The name 
attached to his various crimes varies. He joined up with 
the Bastards to escape his life of contract killing in the 
hope of retiring to the countryside a rich man. At night, 
he's haunted by those he's slain for coin. 

Ilinar. Devoted to the elven god of war, Shevarash, a NG 

moon elf war priest, is a veteran of several wars. After 
years of serving in the Waterdeep City Guard, he found 
employment as a mercenary. He eventually gave that up 
too before finally setting out as an adventurer. Ilinar is 
crass and impatient. His holy symbol bears a broken 
arrow over a single teardrop. 

ADVENTURING PARTY QUICK TABLES
You can quickly throw together an adventuring party with 
the following tables.

Party Alignment. It pays to be wary in this cutthroat 

world, especially down in the lawless depths of 
Undermountain. Every party has a general alignment that 
they all follow—birds of a feather, and all that. Rarely can 
good and evil coexist for long, and parties are often 
subjected to too much stress to overcome these 
differences. 

Traits. Every party has a collective trait that they've 

gravitated towards after such a perilous career. These 
traits are similar to ideals that an individual character 
would follow. 

Prestige. An adventuring party, per the following 

tables, comes in the levels of Amateur, Veteran, and Elite. 
Amateurs can be encountered in the upper reaches of 
Undermountain, while Veterans can survive Levels 4-7. 
Elite parties can be found in the lower depths but still 
peter out around Level 11. You can use these rankings to 
determine the statistics of individual party members. 

Members. Every party needs a leader and a second. 

Additionally, in Undermountain, parties tend to follow 
the basic paradigm of a defender, supporter, and a few 
strikers. Parties always consist of at least three, but never 
more than six members—too much loot to distribute, too 
many mouths to feed, too many tempers for a leader to 
keep in check. Large groups naturally splinter into smaller 
parties when its members are too disgruntled by the status 
quo. 

PARTY NAME

d10 Adjective
d10 Noun

1
Reasonable
1
Chaps

2
Last
2
Laugh

3
Crimson
3
Jesters

4
Platinum
4
Fist

5
[Location/Name]'s
5
Sneer

6
Desperate
6
Gang

7
Brass
7
Fellowship

8
Tart but Polite
8
Minstrels

9
Curious
9
Knights

10
Gilded
10
Curs

PARTY TRAIT

d8
Trait

1
Cautious. The party lives by this proverb: "There are 
brave adventurers and old adventurers—but no old, 
brave adventurers." 

2
Opportunist. The party never assists unless victory is 
assured, and they can reap some of the rewards.

3
Greedy. The party will risk it all for a few coins more. 
There's no limit to how much they can covet.

4
Self-Righteous. The party believes its actions, and 
itself, to always be in the right, no matter what. Often, 
they have a cause they champion. 

5
Compassionate. The party will assist others they deem 
trustworthy, even to their own detriment. 

6
Loyal. The party's word is their bond. Even in the face 
of overwhelming odds, they'll stand beside their friends 
and allies, never forsaking each other.

7
Treacherous. Any way the wind blows—that's the 
party's creed. So long as they emerge on top, no price 
is too great. Alas, this treachery all but ensures that they 
can never trust each other.

8
Survivors. The party will weather any cost to their 
wallet, conscience, or soul if it means they'll make it 
just one more day.


26

PARTY ALIGNMENT

d6
Alignment
d6
Alignment

1-2
Lawful
1-2
Good

3-4
Neutral 
3-4
Neutral

5-6
Chaotic
5-6
Evil

PARTY MEMBER RACES
d10Race
d10Race

1 Human
6 Elf

2 Halfling
7 Half-orc

3 Gnome
8 Half-elf

4 Dragonborn
9 Tiefling

5 Dwarf
10 GoblinVGM

PARTY DEFENDER STATISTICS
Prestige Statistics
Amateur Berserker (CR 2) or Knight (CR 3)
Veteran Gladiator (CR 5) 

Elite
ChampionVGM (CR 9)

PARTY SUPPORTER STATISTICS
PrestigeStatistics
Amateur Priest (CR 2) or Druid (CR 2) or BardVGM (CR 2)
Veteran IllusionistVGM (CR 3) or EnchanterVGM (CR 5)

Elite
War priestVGM (CR 9) or DivinerVGM (CR 9)

PARTY MARTIAL STRIKER STATISTICS
PrestigeStatistics
Amateur Spy (CR 1/2), Noble (CR 1/8) or Scout (CR 1)
Veteran Bandit Captain (CR 2) or Archer (CR 3)

Elite
Assassin (CR 8)

PARTY SPELLCASTER STRIKER STATISTICS
PrestigeStatistics
Amateur Cult Fanatic (CR 2)
Veteran Mage (CR 6), Drow Mage (CR 7) or Warlock of the 

Great Old OneVGM (CR 6)

Elite
EvokerVGM (CR 9) or NecromancerVGM (CR 9)

CHARACTER CREATION

This adventure is a curious one. It's designed to see 
adventurers from 5th-level to the mythic fourth tier of 
play—and yet, since it's all confined in one dungeon, little 
story can be expected to develop. Further, a high mortality 
rate can be expected given Undermountain's lack of 
civilization and safety, and its overabundance of danger. 

Personal Narrative. A campaign that reaches 17th-

level, let alone 20th, is the stuff of dreams for many a 
player. However, given the lack of DotMM's narrative, 
characters might lack for personal growth unless you, the 
DM, go out of your way to intertwine the adventurers' 
personal development with the dungeon or allow them a 
brief foray to the surface. Several quest hooks are 
included to alleviate this inherent flaw of the module. 

A Warning from Dragon Heist. Despite being 

advertised as a sequel to Waterdeep: Dragon Heist, this 
adventure can't be any more different. DotMM not only 
encourages but requires characters optimized for combat, 
for a dungeon crawl—not the intrigue-savvy characters 
designed to unravel plots and excel at social encounters. 
If your players are intent on bringing their Dragon Heist 
characters, don't skimp out on this warning.

PARTY COMPOSITION
This adventure is, without all the bells and whistles, a 
megadungeon crawl, harkening back to the ancient days 
of D&D. While other published 5E adventures do their 
best to dispel the necessity of having a dedicated healer 
and a dedicated defender, DotMM essentially requires it. 
Parties that don't follow this paradigm will find 
themselves in trouble later.

Danger Abounds. The adventurers will be hard-pressed 

to find the time or safety for a long rest. They may often 
be forced to travel through one or two levels before they 
can actually rest—they shouldn't expect to begin or finish 
a new level with the benefit of a long rest. Thus, a party 
that is overly-reliant on long rests, as opposed to short 
rests, will struggle while parties with fighters, warlocks, 
and monks will fare a bit better. 

SKILLS, SPELLS, ITEMS & PROFICIENCIES
Much of DotMM is gated behind certain spells and 
languages. Without giving spoilers to your players, warn 
them that the following will go a long way:
• Languages such as Elvish, Dwarvish, Goblin, and 

Undercommon are spoken by many denizens.

• Underrated spells such as comprehend languages, detect 

magic, knock, identify, mending, speak with dead, and 
tongues will prove very useful.

• Items such as rope, climbing gear, and dungeoneer's 

packs, otherwise ignored by players, are needed.

• If you'd like to enforce the harsh reality of dungeon 

delving, tools such as weaver's tools and the like, will 
be necessary for repairing broken objects. 


27

RACES OF UNDERMOUNTAIN
The sentient races of Undermountain are numerous and 
scattered across its many levels. Many make for decent 
adventurers of their own right, especially if they're 
motivated to put down the Mad Mage and spare their 
people from his antics. 

Deep Gnomes. While hardly mentioned, it's more than 

likely that a few deep gnomes eke out a small living in 
Undermountain. One druid in particular once tended to a 
Zurkhwood grove on Level 4 before the encroachment of 
the aboleth Illuun. If any player characters are deep 
gnomes, they might be on a quest to find this wayward 
druid (or perhaps they are the druid, if that character 
chooses the druid class). See L4, Area 13 for details.

Drow. The bowels of Undermountain teem with drow 

as Houses Freth and Auvryndar duke it out for 
sovereignty. A drow character could be an exile, a 
member of a vanquished house, or belong to either two. 
House Freth is the more sympathetic of the two, if only 
for the fact it hasn't antagonized the adventurers like 
House Auvryndar has.

Duergar. The Underdark is too close to comfort to 

Undermountain (or Undermountain too close to it, rather) 
and duergar are easy to find. Clan Ironeye has invaded the 
Lost Level in the search of artifacts. Many also live in 
Skullport, employed by the Xanathar Guild. 

Gith. From the Crystal Labyrinth, a githyanki force 

wages war against the mind flayer colony of Seadeeps. 
Additionally, a group of githzerai inhabit Level 15, ready 
and willing to aid their distant cousins if the need arises. 
Gith characters may 
be disgruntled with their 

organizations' tactics, or might be shunned as failures, and 
therefore could join the adventurers in the hope of 
eradicating the colony. 

Goblinoids. 
Bugbears, goblins, 
and 
hobgoblins 

permeate the upper reaches of Undermountain, often 
serving in the Xanathar Guild, the Legion of Azrok, or the 
Goblin Bazaar. Bugbear adventurers could be recruited 
from any of these factions with motivations of expanding 
influence or escaping out from under the thumb of their 
rulers. For example, a goblinoid of the Legion of Azrok 
might discover that intellect devourers have replaced the 
minds of many of the Legion's finest. Fearing for their 
own life, they might get out before it's too late. See Volo's 
Guide to Monsters for the statistics for making goblinoid 
player characters.

Skullport Folk. The Port of Shadows has existed for so 

long that it's feasible for almost any character of any race 
to emerge as an adventurer. Characters are bound only 
(mostly) by their imagination. Human Netherese 
descendants, grounded pirates, estranged drow, lone 
survivors of past adventuring parties—any manner of folk 
can be found in the Port of Shadows and welcomed into 
the party's ranks. 

REPLACING PLAYER CHARACTERS
So, you must wonder, what if a player's character dies? 
How will you introduce this new character with the 
adventurers so far from the surface? A number of ideas 
abound:

Halaster's Game. No matter who the player character 

is, for some inscrutable reason, the Mad Mage has 
determined that it is his or her fate to toil on his insidious 
gameshow. He has since teleported the character to 
Undermountain. 

Skullport. Skullport teems with seedy individuals or 

waylaid immigrants. While large vessels cannot reach the 
harbor, smaller boats can, and any character may have 
washed up at the Port of Shadows. They may also be one 
of the prisoners held on Skull Island. If the party is 
imprisoned by the Xanathar Guild, they can easily meet 
the new player character and then stage a prison break.

Lone Survivor. The player character is the last survivor 

of a doomed adventuring party that has seen many of the 
previous levels of Undermountain. By happenstance, they 
run into the party. 

Escaped Slave. The player character was enslaved by 

the drow, Xanathar Guild, the Legion of Azrok, or to the 
aboleth of the Twisted Caverns. 

Petrified. The player character was one of the many 

creatures petrified in Halaster's storage vault on Level 2, 
Area 25. Someone has freed them from that stony fate and 
loosed them back into the world. 

THE CALL TO ADVENTURE
Why venture to Undermountain? It's a good question, one 
to be asked by both you and your players. Unlike other 
adventures whose motives boil down to saving the world 
or escaping some dark prison, Dungeon of the Mad Mage 
is one that is, seemingly, spurred only by the lust for gold 
and glory. While some quests exist, and the perpetual 
motives of gold, glory, and power can be relied upon, 
you'll be pressed to craft your own narrative. It's 
recommended you instead turn to your own players as a 
source of creativity. 

You can use any of the following hooks to help involve 

your players' characters in the narrative. Some minor 
spoilers exist, such as the existence of an illithid colony, 
so you'll need to suss out how much you can share with 
your players. 

HALASTER’S GAME
Best for: All adventurers
Much to their mounting horror, the adventurers learn that 
the Mad Mage has chosen the current party and they soon 
learn that all the initial motivations they had to come to 
Undermountain were carefully orchestrated by Halaster 
Blackcloak himself. 


28

The characters might reflect on moments where a 

crotchety old man shouted in a bar “Ye’ll never be nothin’ 
if ye cain’t survive the horrors o’ Undermountain” or 
whispered, “Gold and glory awaits all those brave enough 
to descend Undermountain—the greatest dungeon in the 
world. Legends are forged there, and fortunes found.” 

Perhaps a financial calamity was put upon their family. 

Perhaps a natural disaster destroyed their home. Perhaps 
a lost friend or brother has prompted this sojourn into 
Undermountain. Perhaps these and all were orchestrated 
by Halaster Blackcloak's insidious wish spells.

THE ACADEMY BECKONS
Best for: Bards, sorcerers, warlocks, wizards
Halaster, or the faculty of Dweomercore, has reached out 
to an arcane spellcaster, such as a bard or wizard, and 
invited them to the arcane academy on Level 9. Alas this 
“full-ride scholarship” can’t be refused, but also can’t be 
earned unless the character braves the first eight floors of 
Undermountain. 

CALASSABRAK'S COMEUPPANCE
Best for: Duergar nobles
Prince Valtagar Steelshadow, the disgraced duergar 
prince, has brought dishonor to his family. A duergar 
adventurer may have a bit of Steelshadow blood in his 
veins and hopes to elevate him- or herself in the family by 
bringing Valtagar’s head back to his older brother, King 
Horgar Steelshadow V. See Level 21 for more details.

DROW WARFARE 
Best for: Dark elves
Drow belonging to House Auvryndar, Freth, or any 
related vassal (or eradicated) house may feel compelled to 
oppose or aid these houses. 

House Tanor'thal. This drow house once ruled 

Skullport but was toppled by the Xanathar Guild. Perhaps 
its survivors fled to either House Freth or House 
Auvryndar and now serve in the war. 

EXILED!
Best for: Criminals
Since ancient times, Waterdeep has rejected the 
"barbarism" of executing criminals in favor of merely 
banishing them to Undermountain. To return is to swing 
at the end of the noose, and to remain is risks being torn 
apart by whatever horrors roam the dark. Any character, 
preferably with the Criminal background, could have 
been sentenced here. Perhaps that character will find the 
means to another land, emerging outside of Waterdeep. 
Perhaps they'll find enough power or gold to flout the law 
instead. 

CALL TO ADVENTURE HOOKS
Hook
Suitable for…

Halaster's Game
All adventurers

The Academy Beckons
Wizards, sorcerers, bards

Calassabrak's Comeuppance Duergar nobles
Drow Warfare
Drow nobles

Exiled!
Criminals of Waterdeep

Fine Fellows of Daggerford Scorned adventurers
The Gith's Crusade
Githyanki, Githzerai

Legacy of the Melairkyn
Dwarves, anthropologists

The Legion Calls
Goblinoids 

Moonstar Redemption
Moonstar nobles

Patron's Favor
Warlocks

Straight Outta Skullport
All adventurers

Torm's Shame
Clerics or devotees of Torm

Wyllow's Consort
Druids, rangers, clerics

THE FINE FELLOWS OF DAGGERFORD
Best for: Bounty hunters, scorned adventurers
A murderous band of adventurers called the Fine Fellows 
have rampaged across the Sword Coast for almost three 
years. The player character is one of the many who have 
been wronged by this band and now they seek revenge—
and they've since learned that those bastards have delved 
into the lawless depths of Undermountain. See L1 & 2 for 
more details. 

Other Parties. Likewise, you can include other 

adventurers or characters that may have wronged a player 
character, adding them to Undermountain. 

THE GITH'S CRUSADE
Best for: Githzerai or Githyanki
Gith characters, or characters with a personal history of 
facing mind flayers, learn that there’s a colony deep 
below Undermountain. They may wish to wage a crusade 
against this colony or join the existing one. 

Githyanki. Led by the cruel and deceitful knight, 

Al'chaia, the githyanki raise and train their young on the 
asteroid Stardock, since creatures don't age on the Astral 
Plane. An adventurer may be a scorned or exiled knight 
fed up with Al'chaia's lack of effective leadership or a 
young trainee looking to prove themselves.

Githzerai. Four githzerai inhabit Level 15, keeping a 

close eye on their cousins' war with the illithid. Their 
leader, Yrlakka, hails from the Sha'sal Khou, a renegade 
faction that hopes to unify the gith race. A githzerai 
adventurer might seek to rebuke Yrlakka's quest, or 
rescue Ezria, a githzerai comrade imprisoned by the 
githyanki. 

LEGACY OF THE MELAIRKYN 
Best for: Dwarves, archaeologists & other scholars
Dwarf characters, particularly archaeologists, know that 
Undermountain was once the realm of the legendary 
Melairkyn dwarves. They fell eons ago to the drow and 
duergar, but their legacy might remain intact—or, 
somewhere in the ashes, there still might lie the secret of 
their great success. See Level 6 for more information. 


29

THE LEGION CALLS
Best for: Goblins, hobgoblins & bugbears
Goblinoid characters hear word of either the Legion of 
Azrok under command of the hobgoblin warlord, or the 
Death’s Head Phalanx under the command of Azrok’s 
estranged son, Doomcrown. Hungering for glory, favor, 
or the pride of serving, the adventurer heads to 
Undermountain. See Levels 3 and 14 for more details on 
these legions. 

MOONSTAR REDEMPTION
Best for: Human or half-elf Waterdhavian nobles
If a human or half-elf character belongs to House 
Moonstar of Waterdeep, they might feel compelled to 
restore their family’s honor by eradicating the Shar 
cultists of Vanrakdoom on Level 18 of Undermountain. 

As described in "The Dark Fate of Lord Vanrak 

Moonstar" on Level 18, House Moonstar has since 
prospered with the death of Vanrak. It is ruled by the 
senile Lady Wylynd Moonstar. She has designated her 
half-drow grandnephew, Helion Moonstar, as the heir to 
the house. There are those in House Moonstar that chafe 
and scoff at such a decision—and many wonder if another 
family member could transcend Helion by eradicating the 
last of the Shar cultists of Vanrakdoom, thereby purging 
House Moonstar of Vanrak's shadow once and for all. An 
adventurer belonging to House Moonstar may then view 
Undermountain as the engine of their ascendance. 
Alternatively, the character's friend or spouse may belong 
to House Moonstar, and the adventurer may wish to 
elevate them to the throne. 

PATRON'S FAVOR
Best for: Warlocks
A warlock's patron may have a vested interest in the 
dealings of Undermountain. This interest will vary not 
only by the patron's own identity, but it's very form of 
being. Follow the suggestions below:

Archfey. An archfey may covet Wyllow's sylvan realm 

on Level 5 and orchestrate her downfall through the 
warlock. Or, Otto the Faerie Dragon on Level 7 may have 
once slighted the archfey and it now demands its painful, 
humiliating death.

Celestial. Similar to Torm's Shame (see below), a 

celestial patron may wish for the warlock to venture to 
Level 21 and either bring the fallen planetar back into the 
light—or cleanse its shadow from the world. 

Fiend. A demonic patron may wish for Skullport to fall 

to anarchy and thereby conspires to topple the Xanathar 
Guild without any viable regime to follow. A devil patron 
may have a would-be tyrant/puppet ready to seize control. 
All the fiend needs is for the warlock to fan the flame of 
rebellion against the Xanathar Guild into a raging inferno. 

Great Old One. Rarely is a Great Old One patron even 

aware of its warlock. Therefore, the warlock may be 
interested in the Knot in the Weave far below 
Undermountain, researching it for the sake of knowledge. 
Or, perhaps, the warlock is intrigued by the Shadowdusk's 
dealings with the Far Realm on Level 22 and wish to see 
the horrors themselves firsthand or apprehend their 
research. 

Undying One. On Level 20 lairs Ezzat the Lich. The 

Mad Mage seeks to destroy the troublesome undead—
who might very well be the warlock's patron, requiring 
their aid. 

STRAIGHT OUTTA SKULLPORT 
Best for: All adventurers
Characters that grew up in or have spent several years in 
Skullport may be keen to finally escape the Port of 
Shadows—but know they need wealth or experience 
before going to the surface. This is especially useful as a 
replacement for any future characters in case the original 
adventurers die. 

TORM’S SHAME
Best for: devotees of Torm, clerics
The God of Courage and Self-Sacrifice now cringes with 
shame, for one of its divine planetars has fallen from grace 
and rules from deep in Undermountain. The planetar can 
only be shown the error of its way by one of Torm’s 
faithful—and thus, the adventurer has received divine 
guidance from their lord to redeem the angel. See Level 
21 for more details.

Alternatively, Torm sends his champion to destroy or 

redeem the death knights Dezmyr and Zalthar of 
Shadowdusk Hold, who were once paladins of Torm. 
Ultimately, 
however, 
these 
fallen 
heroes 
are 

irredeemable. See Level 22 for details. 

WYLLOW’S CONSORT
Best for: Druids, rangers, and nature clerics
The winds and birds carried a message far and wide: the 
elven maiden has chosen this character (a druid, ranger, 
or nature cleric) to be her consort, to frolic in the wonders 
of Wyllowwood far below the Undermountain. Alas, they 
must hurry, for other suitors have been approached, and 
the maiden grows lonelier by the day. See Level 5 for 
more information.


30

LEVEL I: THE DUNGEON LEVEL

"And so the game begins—my game," – the Mad Mage

QUICK NOTES
•
Your foremost goal is to steer the party towards A27, 
the Hidden Demiplane so as to introduce them to the 
Mad Mage. Halaster is the greatest facet of this 
adventure and providing him facetime is necessary to 
underscore what sort of insidious game the 
adventurers are now trapped in. 

•
The Undertakers are hostile but sensible. They merely
rely on threats and force but quickly yield. They'd 
sooner let the adventurers pass by than die for a 
handful of gold and will trade information about the 
dungeon for their lives.  

•
A rift has grown between the Undertakers' leaders, 
Uktarl and Harria. Consider either a comically 
insignificant cause for their falling out, such as a 
misplaced memento or one using a doppelganger to 
"test" the other's fidelity. 

•
Manticores (see A16) can speak Common! Consider 
instead having them mock the adventurers and goad 
them into combat rather than attacking them outright, 
and don't forget that they can fly—grapple the gnome 
with a bite and ascend!

•
The revenant (see A37) is a source of excellent 
roleplay and makes a valuable ally for both the DM 
and players: he can assist the party but has a 
guaranteed expiration date: once his vengeance is 
fulfilled, his soul departs this world. There's no worry 
in bloating the players' firepower from now until the 
possible end of the campaign as you often get when 
adding an NPC ally to the group. 

•
Remember that tunnels on the edges of the map lead 
to uncharted depths or back into the mapped dungeon. 
You can add whatever you want along those paths. 

•
Separated from civilization, the adventurers must 
track their inventory—you must track their inventory, 
otherwise they have no need to return to the surface. 

•
Every time the adventurers return to a previous level, 
new occupants will be there to reshape it in the 
aftermath of a power vacuum. 

ROLEPLAYING THE MAD MAGE
In the Companion, Halaster Blackcloak is a deranged 
gameshow host whose program, Dungeon of the Mad 
Mage, is broadcasted across the multiverse. The 
adventurers are just the newest crop of "contestants," as 
they'll soon learn. Refer to Halaster's Game for more 
information on this game, its rules, and the Mad Mage.

Introduction. Halaster remains distant and quiet while 

the adventurers explore L1. When it comes to L1, less is 
more. Let the dungeon itself speak for Halaster's cruelty 
and peril. Let the suspense swell. Only if they find A27, 
the Hidden Demiplane, do they encounter the Mad Mage. 

RUMORS AND WARNINGS

d8 Information

1

"Folks have been sayin' there's a vampire out there on 
the first level o' the dungeon. Expects a toll to be paid, 
or eternity as her thrall."

2
"Goblins got some sorta bazaar down there in the depths. 
It's worth checkin' out. Mayhaps they've got bread."

3
"Better bring antivenom. Those depths are crawling with 
them spider-loving drow."

4

"Watch out for signs of Tunnel Madness, friend. Starts 
slow, but soon it's flowerin' like a plague. Don't need any 
monsters down there to doom a party. Worst monster is 
man, just you watch."

5

"Far below the surface is Skullport: a subterranean port 
of thieves and slavers and pirates set on a sunless sea. 
The night life is insane."

6
"Trust no one. A friend on the surface would just as soon 
as cut your throat for lamp oil."

7
"Beware the wrath of Xanathar—even in the depths the 
guild has worked its influence."

8

"Legend 
says 
Halaster 
Blackcloak 
had 
seven 

apprentices, all sharing a shard of his madness. Even 
now, even after a millennium, they might still be kicking 
around in the dark. Watch out."

BEFORE THE DESCENT
Undermountain offers no shortage of fortune or peril. For 
fame and glory, perhaps even power, the adventurers have 
committed themselves to those foul depths. After a night 
of drinks and debauchery—a night that might be their 
last—the adventurers have arrived at the Yawning Portal, 
groggy eyed and sobered by the horrors to come.

Provisioning. Dungeon of the Mad Mage is a dungeon 

crawl, a tale of caustic survival. If the adventurers want to 
make it out alive, they better be prepared—because once 
they're down there, the way back is rife with danger. 
They're advised (through patrons, friends, and other 
learned folk) to bring torches, antivenom, rations for at 
least two weeks, healing kits and more.

Rumors & Warnings. Undermountain is older than 

Waterdeep itself and is rife with legendary tales and dire 
omens. Before the adventurers embark on their journey, 
they can carouse with other patrons in the Yawning Portal 
to learn about the dungeon. In addition to the Secrets Deck 
(described in Appendix C of DotMM), you can roll on the 
Rumors and Warnings table below to provide some brief 
information to the adventurers before they descend. 

Durnan's Advice The innkeeper of the Yawning Portal 

might offer some advice to the adventurers before they 
descend into Undermountain. Ever a man of brevity, his 
advice is brutally simple. Read:
Durnan pulls you aside, his grim face like stone. As he 
fills a flagon with ale, he tells you, "Remember. There are 
brave adventurers and old adventurers—but no brave, old 
adventurers. Be smart down there. Know when to run."


31

RANDOM ENCOUNTERS
Wandering monsters can be encountered throughout the 
dungeon, especially if the adventurers stop for a rest or 
visit an otherwise empty area. Three encounters are 
already described in DotMM, Chapter 1. 

The additional encounters can be used. Roll a d8 and 

consult with the table below.  

A CLOUD OF STIRGES
There is no wind in this foul place, but in the shortening 
distance you hear the flutter of wings. Many, many wings. 
Out from the dark comes a cloud of minute, bat-like 
creatures wielding bloodied proboscises.
Stirges descend upon the adventurers, totaling 2d4 + 2 in 
number. They latch on to the least armored creature. 

ALL HAIL THE GHOUL KING
A gang of ghouls (1d4 + 2 in all) recently found an old 
jeweled crown and have lost themselves in a chivalric 
fantasy. They purport themselves as knights serving "the 
king." When they encounter the adventurers, they demand 
the king's tax to be paid: one humanoid to be slain and 
devoured, a feast the ghouls offer the adventurers to 
partake in. They suggest that the tax be collected from the 
Undertakers or the Xanathar Guild—though a single 
goblin is only worth half. 

The ghouls become unhinged and hostile if their fantasy 

is ruined. On some level they each know that this is all 
make-believe but can find nothing else to soften the 
monotony of undeath. They claim to obey standards of 
honor (gleaned from their many past captives, one of 
which was a knight) and faithfully serve King Ghanash, a 
ghast which can be found in Area 17B, being pampered 
by four ghouls. 

Ghanash's crown, gold and bejeweled with rubies, is 

worth 250 gp. It was found on a lower level of 
Undermountain and brought up by adventurers who met 
their doom on their way out of the dungeon. 

ARROWS GALORE
The adventurers encounter a trap set by Halaster. 
Inscribed upon a surface is a glyph of warding that 
triggers a spell of cordon of arrows (spell save DC 18). It 
launches eight arrows, each dealing 1d6 piercing to the 
creature that triggered the trap. On a success, a creature 
takes half damage. 

CORPSE
The adventurers come across a corpse, determined by a 
d4. Its age, end, and loot are determined below. 

1. The corpse belongs to a Xanathar Guild goblin 

riddled with crossbow bolts carrying a missive addressed 
to the bugbears of Big Ears Watch Post (Area 39) and 
describes a plot to invade Skullport on the third level of 
the dungeon. 

RANDOM ENCOUNTERS

d8 Encounter
1
Goblin Skull Hunters (see DotMM)

2
A Cloud of Stirges

3
Arrows Galore

4
Shield Guardian (see DotMM)

5
Discarded Satchel

6
Carrion Crawlers (see DotMM)

7
Corpse

8
All Hail the Ghoul King

2. This male human corpse is fresh and will attract the 

attention of a carrion crawler if the adventurers linger 
for more than three rounds. The human ostensibly met its 
end through starvation. 

3. The corpse is a butchered lamb, still fresh. It was once 

a halfling adventure afflicted by a spell of true polymorph
by the Mad Mage himself. Once its duration was 
complete, the transformation became permanent. A 
tattered cloak nearby was once a cloak of invisibility
(ruined now and forevermore) that Halaster refitted for 
the lamb before setting his victim on a deranged quest to 
escape Undermountain in his new form. Traces of 
transmutation magic still linger over the corpse and cloak. 

4. The corpse belongs to a condemned criminal (a 

female human) that fled into Undermountain. Tattooed on 
her neck is the black, flying snake symbol of the 
Zhentarim. Her left foot is shattered, and the hallway is 
smeared with her blood. Upon the wall she's written, 
"Gods watch over me" in her own blood. 

DISCARDED SATCHEL
The adventurers find a satchel, potentially filled with 
goods to help them on their journey. The satchel may be 
stained with blood or yellowed with age depending on its 
contents. Roll a d8 to determine the satchel's contents.

SATCHEL CONTENTS
d8 Contents
1
Explorer's pack

2

Roll a 3d4. The satchel contains spell scrolls; roll thrice 
to determine each scroll: a scroll of healing word (1), 
augury (2), fireball (3), or knock (4). 

3
A gold locket with an inlaid portrait of an elven woman 
worth 75 gp

4
2 healer's kits, an unlit torch, and moldy, bloodied 
bandages from wounds long since healed

5
1d4 + 1 potions of healing

6
Roll a d4. The satchel contains a holy symbol of: Shar 
(1), Helm (2), Selûne (3), or Tyr (4)

7
A jar of eyeballs. Just a jar full of eyeballs. 

8
A map detailing Level 1 of Undermountain. There's a 
75% chance that it is inaccurate. 


32

AREAS OF NOTE

The following areas are of note:

1. ENTRY WELL
Down and down into the mythic depths you descend while 
the winch creaks and groans. Adventure awaits, but so too 
does death. A death that has claimed countless souls, 
many of them quicker and cleverer than you could ever 
hope to be. What do you truly hope to find down here? 
Fame? Fortune? Power? Countless others have too, and
this dungeon is their tomb. 

Your feet touch sand and the last torchlight of the world 

above flickers. The distant sounds of the Yawning Portal 
dwindle into thundering silence. Your eyes adjust to the 
gloom: shields galore line the walls, all dented, all stained 
with graffiti… On the wall is a message written in Elvish 
script. Written in blood. 
Trinkets in the Sand. To quickly determine the trinket 
found in the sand, roll a d10 and consult the table. 

THE BLOODY MESSAGE
The message, written in Elvish, has been expanded. Read:
Beyond the pillars the Mad Mage awaits
peering from behind those black gates
Ever searching for one of worth
and burying all else in the tepid earth 
Halaster's Game. Using this variant, the message instead 
reads "WELCOME TO THE SHOW."

6. UNDERTAKER'S WATCH POST
Here toils a gang of failed thespians that now extort 
adventurers on their way through Undermountain. 

Roleplaying the Undertakers. As failed actors and 

singers, the Undertakers take to their new roles with 
gusto—they really ham it up. Every successful extortion, 
every adventurer sent running, is worth a thousand 
reviews from Waterdhavian critics and broadsheets.
Theirs is a life of desperation. Many fear the law's wrath 
that might come should they surface. Some may have 
even fallen prey to Weave Addiction (see HG). 

Commodities. As dwellers of the deep, the Undertakers 

would kill (literally) for any of the comforts of the world 
above: fresh fruit, clean clothes, lamp oil, reading 
material, new bedding, and the like. Every so often they 
send the doppelgangers up to the surface to shop for these 
materials, who take on new appearances each time so 
none of the Yawning Portal patrons know that they belong 
to the gang of thieves that extort adventurers. If the 
adventurers have any of these things, they may find that 
they can barter with the Undertakers—or that these 
"vampires" have a keen obsession with something so 
mundane. 

TRINKETS IN THE SAND
d10 Trinket

1
A rotted lucky rabbit's foot

2
A glass eye

3
A gold monocle worth 10 gp

4
A receipt from Ed's Adventure Emporium for rope, 
rations, and "dungeon bunnies"

5
A broken gnomish lamp

6
An insignia from the Waterdeep City Guard

7
A severely inaccurate map depicting Level 1 of 
Undermountain

8
A bronze mask in the shape of Halaster's visage

9
A manticore tail spike tipped in dried blood

10
A morbid diary describing an adventurer's trek through 
the first three levels of Undermountain

6A. THE SHOWDOWN
"Halt!" rumbles a voice from the dark. Torchlight sputters 
in the chamber, silhouetting nine figures. Yellow fangs 
gleam with red grime. "You stand in the dreaded crypts of 
Countess Harria herself—and our master shall have her 
due, you cattle. Choose now: gold or blood, lest you be 
damned like us."
The voice belongs to Uktarl. He's learned that having an 
unseen countess (Harria Valashtar) is far more frightening 
than presenting himself as the vampire lord and instead 
acts as her envoy. Despite the two lovers' recent falling 
out, Uktarl gives the performance his all. 

Several of the bandits are dressed in rags. Carefully 

applied make-up paints them as walking corpses: vampire 
spawn. If questioned, they pretend to be fallen victims of 
the countess, now enslaved to her will for all eternity. 

10. CUBICLE OF SKULLS
You come upon a stone door. Engraved into the lintel is a 
message that reads: "CONTESTANTS." 
"Contestants" refer to the countless fools that found 
themselves trapped on Dungeon of the Mad Mage. Once 
the door is opened, skulls tumble out. Add the following 
description: 
The room teems with skulls—some scorched, some 
nicked, some with combovers of rotting flesh, but all 
underneath a frayed banner that reads: "WELCOME,
GUESTS!"

13. EMPTY ROOM
When the adventurers enter this room, they may trigger 
one of Halaster's regional effects. You can use the one 
below: an illusory, upside-down den.
The door squeals on its hinges and opens upon a reversed 
room: a fireplace hangs from the ceiling, casting shadows 
across the den. Upside-down bookshelves teem with 
ancient tomes. Some float in the cold air, opened on their 
spines. A high-backed chair is firmly set on the ceiling, its 
arms nicked and scarred. 


33

You may also want to consider planting a bronze mask
here, so your players can access Halaster's Hidden 
Demiplane (see Area 27). If so, it floats just within arm's 
reach in the center of the room. If a character takes the 
mask, the illusion shatters. The den becomes an empty 
stone room—but the mask is real and true. 

14. LITTLE BOX OF HORRORS
The tunnel slants downward, pressing in on you. Your 
footfalls echo, spinning a bumpy yarn—and below that, 
you hear something far more unsettling: a heartbeat. A 
slow, methodical heartbeat that seems to pulsate through 
the stone beneath your feet. 

Sick with curiosity and dread, you come to a sunken

chamber. An orb of sizzling acid floats in the domed 
ceiling, suspended by unseen magic. Below stands a four-
armed piscine statue… and in its hands is a box. An ornate 
box from which that foul heartbeat can be heard. 
Heart of a Champion. You can throw your adventurers a 
bone by making the heart the equivalent of a Magic 8-
Ball. If a creature attunes to the heart, instead of dying (a 
rather anticlimactic end to a character), you can instead 
allow them to ask questions to the heart—and they sense 
the answers "in [their] heart."

The heart has a sliver of its owner's personality: that of 

a lazy, corner-cutting student prone to acting first and 
thinking later and unable to consider the consequences of 
its actions. It lacks the awareness to know what fate befell
it, but a dim part glowers with hatred for Halaster 
Blackcloak and wishes to see the Mad Mage's work 
undone. Whenever an attuned creature asks the heart a 
question (no action required), roll a d12 and consult with 
the "Magic Hate Ball" table. 

16. MANTICORE DEN
Rather than have the three manticores that dwell here 
immediately attack the adventurers, allow them to play 
with their food. The adventurers may be surprised to learn 
that the beasts can speak and chafe against their smug
demeanor. Read the following:
The chamber reeks with rot and waste. Its ceiling vaults 
out above you, held up by crumbling pillars. As you enter, 
a sinuous voice floats out from the dark:

"Ah… The newest guests of Undermountain. Welcome. 

Welcome to the show."

Your eyes strain to find the source of the voice. It rings 

off every stone off this foul place… And out from the dark 
stalks a beast with the face of a man, the body of a lion, 
and the wings of a drake. Its spiked tail scrapes against a 
nearby pillar. 

"Yours is a special episode," says the beast, flashing a 

smile far too human for your liking. "A special episode 
indeed. The Mad Mage expects great ratings."

MAGIC HATE BALL
d12 Answer

1
"Yeah, go for it."

2
"Do it, you coward."

3
"You know in my heart that it's wrong."

4
"Reconsider it. Twice, maybe."

5
"Sure, why not?"

6
"I wouldn't do that if I were you. But I'm not you."

7
"That way lies death. Probably."

8
"Was your father man enough to do it?"

9
"Brave men make great cannon fodder."

10
"Let your hatred burn. Conquer all before you. Accept 
nothing less."

11
"Don't ask me. I'm a shriveled heart."

12
"You're a champion. You can do just about anything." 

The primary manticore is merely entertaining itself while 
its two companions move into position. Both are hidden. 
Contest their Dexterity (Stealth) checks with the 
adventurers' passive Perception. One is clinging to a 
pillar, ready to rain tail spikes upon their prey while the 
other is prepared to land behind the enemy ranks to attack 
weaker combatants. If a combatant looks physically 
weak, the manticore attempts to grapple it and up to the 
80-foot ceiling. If the adventurers show a willingness to 
talk, the other two hold off until afterwards; it's rare that 
they have guests that listen to their prattling. To them, 
conversation is music, at least until they grow weary of 
the company. 

The manticores admire the Mad Mage, who keeps them 

fed and entertained. They know nothing of his plans but 
are aware of his penchant for calling Undermountain "a 
show" and imitate his terminology. 

HALASTER'S GAME: SICK TRIVIA
Under this variant, the primary manticore launches into a 
game of trivia, asking macabre questions to the 
adventurers. These questions are described in the "Sick 
Trivia" table below. Answers range from subjective to 
concrete, described below. The answer can be determined 
by succeeding on a particular ability check.

While the primary manticore is distracting the 

adventurers, its brethren do their best to remain hidden, 
making Dexterity (Stealth) checks with advantage. It 
promises safe passage if the adventurers correctly answer 
six questions before failing three, but this is a lie. 

The manticores are learned enough to know the answers 

to their own questions, having repeated this game so many 
times with other adventuring parties. They've also 
petitioned the Mad Mage for secrets and lore so as to hone 
their trivia questions. 


34

SICK TRIVIA

d8 Question

1
"Ancient is this realm. On the bones of what civilization 
is the Mad Mage's dungeon built?"

2
"How much blood is in a dwarf's body?"

3
"Which mortal race makes for the gamiest meat?"

4

"This one's a riddle for you: 'Always hungry am I; 
always I must be fed; the finger I lick will soon turn red. 
What am I?'"

5
"What fungus comes alive and shrieks when it senses 
other creatures nearby?"

6

"The dwarves chipped away at their precious mithril 
until the drow came with sword and fire. Down went 
their temples and up went the new. Which deity do these 
elves worship?"

7
"Who amongst you has the juiciest thigh?"

8
"Which of you would scream quickest for mercy as your 
entrails were knitted into a scarf?"

1. A character that succeeds on a DC 15 Intelligence 

(History) check can recall that Waterdeep is built upon the 
bones of a dwarven realm (the Underhalls of Melairbode) 
which itself was built upon the ancient elven kingdom of 
Illefarn. This capitol was named Aelinthaldaar. 

2. A character that succeeds on a DC 14 Wisdom 

(Medicine) check knows that there are six liters of blood 
in the average dwarf's body: shorter than humans they are, 
sure, but stouter too.

3. This question is subject to the whims of the 

manticore. A character that succeeds on a DC 14 Wisdom 
(Perception) check notices that the manticore's eyes linger 
on one character for a split second when it asks this 
question, hinting that they're the answer.

4. A character that succeeds on a DC 16 Intelligence 

(Investigation) check can determine that the answer is 
"fire." An answer of "manticore" or "you" elicits a hearty, 
unsettling chuckle from the monster. 

5. A character that succeeds on a DC 16 Intelligence 

(Nature) check recalls that "shriekers" are semi-sentient 
fungi that emit piercing screams when threatened. 

6. A character that succeeds on a DC 13 Intelligence 

(Religion) can recall that the drow worship Lolth, the 
spider demoness. 

7. A character that succeeds on a DC 16 Wisdom 

(Insight) check can study the manticore's eyes and 
salivation and intuit which of the adventurers it believes 
would make the best meal. 

8. This question has no correct answer. If the 

adventurers have made it this far, the manticore loses its 
patience and initiates the inevitable attack. 

27. HIDDEN DEMIPLANE
It's your top priority to steer the party towards this area, 
as it puts a face to the infamous Mad Mage. If the players 
missed the bronze mask (see A13, Companion and A21, 
DotMM) and it seems they've no intention of searching 
for it, consider waiving the requirement. 

Bait for the Hook. To further entice your players, 

reshape the alcove into a sunken archway and describe it 
as what appears to be a portal frame. Etched into the frame 
is "COME HITHER" in Common. 

Once the characters enter the portal, read the following:

The world itself shrinks to a gloomy realm that stretches 
on in cold, stone pastures for as far as the eye can see. 
Upon a freestanding wood wall hangs a portrait of a 
wizard whose eyes shine with madness—and below sits 
that same man, reading a tome in a high-backed chair.

The wizard looks from his tome and smiles. "Well, don't 

just stand there like a boob. Three questions of this lair 
you can ask; twice will the answer be true, and once false. 
And be quick about it—the show must go on!"
First impressions matter. This is a defining moment of 
your campaign as it determines who the Mad Mage is to 
your players. The tone you strike now will be what sticks 
with them forever. After three questions have been 
answered, you may want Halaster to stick around for a bit 
or eject them from the demiplane with a brutally simple 
gesture that demonstrates his power, such as snapping his 
fingers or merely saying "See you." The adventurers then 
awaken on their backs outside the demiplane in A27. 

EXPECTED QUESTIONS
It's difficult to anticipate your players' questions, but since 
this is the first level of Undermountain, of the campaign, 
few earth-shattering questions could be asked and 
answered—no questions or conspiracies should be 
looming large in your players' minds. Still, the following 
samples can be provided. They aren't bound by the rule of 
"the first is false, the rest of true" described in DotMM. 

If asked where he is currently, Halaster answers 

"Everywhere and nowhere, but watching you. Always." 

If asked what he wants, Halaster says, "Knowledge. 

Always has it been knowledge—for that which exists 
without my knowledge exists without my consent."

If asked why he created this death trap or settled in 

Undermountain, he can either say "I love bringing people 
together" or explain his hunger to reach the forgotten 
depths. See "Weave Addiction" in the DotMM overview
for more information. Not even Halaster can adequately 
identify what lies below the earth, only that it calls out to 
him in his troubled dreams. 

If asked what's in this death trap, Halaster coyly 

answers, "Horrors from behind the stars and below the 
earth. Horrors you shall perhaps one day know."


35

HALASTER'S GAME
The Mad Mage lays out the rules of his insidious game. 
See the Halaster's Game chapter of the Companion for 
details and read the following:
The mage shares a yellow smirk. "Yer mine. Ye've always 
been mine since the day ye learnt to crawl. Yer life has 
led you here. I've led you here." 

Spreading his hands across his lap, Halaster Blackcloak 

continues, "The rules o' the game are simple: die, ye lose. 
Win, ye get yer freedom… and a wish. Anything ye can 
imagine. And t'win, ye have to reach my lair—twenty-
three levels below this delightful madhouse o' mine."

The Mad Mage looks past you and into the vista. His 

accent has morphed into that of a stage director's. "The 
game has been set, the stakes raised. Ladies, gentlemen, 
fiends and friends: give it up for our contestants on this 
season of Dungeon of the Mad Mage. Might they brave 
the horrors of Undermountain and emerge victorious!"

All around you the world erupts into glorious applause 

as some unseen and distant audience whoops and cheers, 
hurling their taunts and praise. Your names are on the lips 
of thousands—what the hell have you gotten yourself in?

The Mad Mage announces to that invisible audience, 

"We'll be back after this break. 'Til then!"
Once this is read, Halaster snaps his fingers, shunting the 
characters out of the demiplane.

36. LOST HALLS
Just as you cut down that last abomination and the sounds 
of battle die down, you hear something else: weeping. 
Shameless, broken weeping from behind a closet door.
This area, A36B, holds Kelim the Weasel of the 
murderous Fine Fellows of Daggerford. He provides a 
meaningful hook for Level 2 of Undermountain and will 
one demonstrate that not only the brave and righteous 
descend to these black depths. If the characters investigate 
the weeping, read:
You swing open the door—and a shriek cuts through the 
depths. A soiled, haggard young man, his eyes red with 
tears, recoils from your sight. His hands instinctively 
shield his face and groin as he screeches, "Mercy! For the 
love of the gods, mercy, please!"

ROLEPLAYING KELIM THE WEASEL
Kelim, already having lacked courage much his life, is 
scared witless. He wants nothing more than to abandon 
Undermountain but is too afraid to make the trek back to 
the Entry Well. Without any shame, he resorts to begging 
to get what he wants.

If the adventurers decide to escort Kelim back, roll for 

two Random Encounters: one along the way, and one 
right before A1, the Entry Well. When within sight of the 
Entry Well, Kelim abandons the others to toss a gold coin
into the Durnan's bucket, screaming for salvation. The 
trip, however, takes 10 rounds while the fight rages on. 

If the adventurers accept Kelim into their ranks, he 

proves to be a liability before anything else. If the 
adventurers encounter the Fine Fellows of Daggerford on 
Level 2 of Undermountain, Kelim betrays them for his old 
adventuring buddies. While his former companions 
spared no time to search for him, he trusts more in their 
hard will to live than the adventurer's altruism. He would 
rather side with survivors than lay in bed with "fools."

THE FINE FELLOWS OF DAGGERFORD
Kelim is sure to be questioned about his former 
companions. All are evil in some manner, but so is Kelim 
and he won't shed light on those facts. They can all be 
found on Level 2, with exception to Halleth who can be 
found in L1, A37. 

The Fine Fellows have already been described in detail 

in Other Adventuring Parties (see Halaster's Game, 
Undermountain: An Overview). Kelim describes his 
companions in the following ways: 

Copper Stormforge is a dwarven thief hungry for all 

that glitters. "Copper's a prick, all right," Kelim admits, 
"but he knows how to work a budget and keep us on track. 
Has an ear for deceit and an eye for detail."

Halleth Garke is a half-elf cleric of Waukeen always 

obsessed with fair shares. Unbeknownst to Kelim, Halleth 
was murdered by the other Fine Fellows two days ago and 
has returned as a revenant hellbent on revenge. Kelim 
says, "You can bet Halleth is there with his hand out 
whenever there's coin about—and nothing's free. Stiff 
him and you'll find his healing magic used elsewhere. He 
carries a grudge like a mother carries her child."

Midna Tauberth is a human priestess of Shar, the Lady 

of Loss. She never backs down from a challenge. A 
character can make a DC 14 Intelligence (Religion) check 
once they learn of Midna's deity, knowing that Shar is an 
evil goddess. "We thought t'bring her, y'know," Kelim 
says, "because Shar's a patron of miners and those that 
venture into the dark depths." 

Rex the Hammer is a human warrior that hungers for 

fame and fortune above all else. He's the Fine Fellows 
cruel and obstinate leader. "His head's full of bravery and 
nothing else," Kelim says. "Real inspiring."

37. MAP ROOM
As you creep through the dungeon, your foot strikes a
loose stone, sending it tumbling down the hall. A voice 
shortly thunders:

"You there! Answer my call and join me on this quest 

for justice!"
The voice belongs to Halleth Garke, the murdered half-elf 
cleric of Waukeen that has since risen as a revenant. 
Except for his undergarments, he lies at the bottom of the 
pit described in Area 37, bereft of any possessions. 


36

If the adventurers approach the pit, read the following:
A pit yawns in the center of the room. Its walls are as 
smooth as a newborn's cheeks and at the bottom of its 
rubble-strewn depths stands a bloodied half-elf. So 
bruised is he that he's green and purple. His arm is bent at 
an angle never intended by his creator. An eyeball hangs 
by a tatter of flesh—but the elf shows no pain. 

He meets your surprise with his good eye. "In the name 

of Waukeen, hallowed be Her name, I compel you: free 
me so that I may avenge my death and join Her Grace in 
the gilded afterlife."
Halleth is deluded. He believes Waukeen herself has sent 
Halleth back—that he's worthy of paradise; that this is just 
one last hiccup that needs to be coughed down before he 
can ascend to her gilded hall. It doesn't even cross his 
mind that he might be bound for the Nine Hells after 
sleeping with such evil dogs such as the Fine Fellows. 

If questioned, Halleth explains his "treacherous 

brethren" beat him to death for demanding equal share of 
treasure. He promises anything if it will get him out of this 
pit. If Kelim is present, he recoils with surprise and 
disgust at the fate that has befallen Halleth—although the 
two were never anything close to friends, he never 
thought his companions would actually murder one of 
their own. Outsiders? Sure. But Halleth? 

Roleplaying the Revenant. Death has soured anything 

bright in Halleth's soul or personality. Hate has scrubbed 
away any desire for anything but vengeance. Once a man 
of mirth, the revenant is now no-nonsense and focused 
only on his quest. He is capable of showing gratitude for 
his rescue and will repay the favor in kind, if only to help 
speed him on his journey to wringing Copper 
Stormforge's thick little neck. All other positive emotions 
are dulled and muted—and Halleth hardly remembers 
what they feel like.

THE FINE FELLOWS OF DAGGERFORD
Like Kelim (see A36), Halleth can shed light on his 
former companions—but now he has no reason to hold 
back the truth. He speaks plainly and viciously of the Fine 
Fellows, revealing their true nature. 

If Kelim is with the party, Halleth decides to save him 

for last. Despite Kelim having no part in his murder 
(Kelim had already wandered off), Halleth is poisoned by 
hate and regret. Death has made him reflect on his past 
sins, chief among them being his tolerance for depravity. 
Kelim now stands as one of four monuments to this fall 
from grace. Whenever the two are alone, or the party is 
resting, Halleth promises Kelim an excruciatingly slow 
and painful death—after witnessing the grisly ends 
Halleth will deliver to the other Fine Fellows. Kelim's 
only hope is for the three other Fine Fellows to die first, 
which causes Halleth's soul to depart from this world. 

EPILOGUE

Once the adventurers find the secret stairs leading to 
Level 2, they should level up to 6th level. 

Choose one of the following narrations to cap off your 

session of Dungeon of the Mad Mage:

THE STANDARD SEND-OFF
The stairs yawn before you like the gullet of a great beast 
that promises you nothing but pain. With sweat on your 
brow and blood on your blades, you look to it and grin. 
Already 
you've 
conquered 
the 
first 
level 
of 

Undermountain—what's another twenty or so?

You share a glance, a smile, and descend together into 

those mythic depths where the greatest heroes are forged.

HALASTER'S GAME: THE HOST'S SEND-OFF
The Mad Mage telepathically speaks to the party during 
this narration, utilizing the concepts of Halaster's Game.
As you clamber down the stone steps, your hearts 
emboldened and your limbs weary, applause rings out. It 
rings out not from the stones of this place but the stones 
of your mind. A voice booms within your skull:

"And so, after great peril and bitter victory, our newest 

guests delve deeper into Undermountain and we at home 
must wonder: who are these blind fools? What do they 
want? Who do they wish to be? What horrors shall they 
face next? Who shall fall and who shall live under the 
shadow of failure? Find out all these and more next time 
on Dungeon of the Mad Mage!" 

Music begins to play within your heads, jaunty and 

jovial and maddening. You look through the stone ceiling 
to the gods above and pray for it to stop. 


37

LEVEL II: THE ARCANE CHAMBERS

"And deeper do our contestants go, down through the 
dark halls of my arcade," – the Mad Mage

QUICK NOTES
•
The goblins of the bazaar are not hostile and should 
go to great pains to keep the peace. 

•
The highlights of this level include: The Fine Fellows 
of Daggerford; Kalabash and Trenzia, the past 
apprentices of Halaster; and the politics raging about 
the Xanathar Guild.

•
It can be difficult to present the feud between the 
Xanathar Guild and the wererats. See "Flight of the 
Wererat" in the Special Events of the Goblin Bazaar 
to present it to your players and use Yek the Tall as a 
mouthpiece to describe the conflict. 

•
There are two gates on this level (Areas 5 & 12). The 
party must be 8th- & 9th-level to use them. 

•
Mimics abound (see Area 22F) so torture your players 
with messages like "That's probably not a mimic," 
possibly even telepathically whispered by Halaster. 

•
The way to Level 3 is through Area 20, the Xanathar 
Guild's outpost. Those that brandish the guild's 
symbol, a circle with ten equidistant spokes, can pass 
through unmolested by the beholder zombie
guardian of A20A. Rizzeryl, the Zhentarim drow, has 
one of these symbols. 

PREVIOUSLY ON DUNGEON OF THE MAD MAGE
There are a few considerations from Level 1 that you need 
to keep in mind when running this chapter:

The Revenant. If the adventurers freed the revenant in 

Area 37 of Level 1, he wastes no time in exacting his 
vengeance. See Halleth's Revenge for more details. 

Kelim the Weasel. If he was rescued in Area 36 of Level 

1, but not allowed to leave Undermountain, Kelim has no 
choice but to follow the adventurers. He will recognize 
his former companions, the Fine Fellows of Daggerford—
and possibly be goaded into betraying his saviors for 
them, if the Fine Fellows can regroup. 

The Missing Prototype. The Undertakers took 

advantage of a flesh golem that wandered up to Level 1; 
it likely originated from Trenzia's laboratory, A7.

Xanathar's Guild. It's conceivable that, if the Guild was 

thwarted by the adventurers on Level 1, they would send 
word to the outposts here on Level 2. The Guild may send 
agents to the goblin bazaar or through the halls to find, 
kidnap, and punish these brazen fools. 

HALLETH'S REVENGE
Brought back to seek out sweet, sweet vengeance against 
his old comrades, Halleth Garke will waste no time in 
seeking out the Fine Fellows of Daggerford—assuming 
the adventurers freed him from L1, A37. 

Halleth's victims number three: the dwarven scout

Copper Stormforge, the human priestess of Shar, Midna 
Tauberth, and Rex the Hammer, a human champion. 
They can be found in Areas 1E, 11, and 13, respectively. 

Roleplaying the Revenant. Halleth believes this 

vengeance is a quest offered by his deity, Waukeen—that 
this is the final trial before everlasting paradise. He's 
sorely mistaken. While Halleth was not completely evil in 
life, his tolerance for it has damned his soul to the Nine 
Hells. Yet he'll go on and on about that "next gilded 
world" which his soul, apparently, will join. 

ADDITIONAL LOOT
Players love loot, even if it's useless. Despite being 
described as a trove of riches for those dumb enough to 
brave it, Undermountain is strangely barren of loot. While 
one can argue that several adventuring parties may have 
picked the level clean, so can one argue that some secrets 
went undiscovered and some adventurers went missing on 
the return trip. Include this additional loot at your own 
discretion. The following items have been added:

Philter of Love. Added to Area 2B, it is the hope of this 

author that an adventurer falls in love with a goblin, albeit 
only for an hour. 

Potions of Healing. Added to Areas 2B and 7C.
Potions of Lightning Resistance. Added to 7C.

RANDOM ENCOUNTERS
Monsters wander this level in search of food. You can also 
use the following encounters to spice up Level 2:

A GRICK AND ITS GOBLIN
Shrill shrieks echo across the darkened halls as wet flesh 
slithers against stone and nails scrape against any 
handhold they might find. 
A grick has ensnared a goblin and is pulling it away into 
a nearby crevice to feast. Characters that speak Goblin 
understand that the poor fellow is screaming for aid: from 
the gods, from his brethren, from his mother. When they 
hear his screams, the distance between the adventurers 
and the goblin is 60 feet. 

If the adventurers save the goblin, it returns to the 

bazaar and tells all of their deeds. The vendors offer a ten 
percent discount (rounded up) to any wares the 
adventurers might buy thereon. 


38

CONJURED OWLBEAR
Bored, Halaster teleports an owlbear into the hall that the 
adventurers are currently in. If you're playing the Mad 
Mage as a deranged gameshow host, his theme song 
heralds this event one round before the owlbear 
materializes. Read:
Music drifts through the halls, ushering in an ill wind as a 
rift forms, bright and violet and turbulent—and out from 
the portal charges a frenzied owlbear!
The portal snaps shut behind the owlbear immediately. 
Halaster positions the portal so that the owlbear flanks the 
most disadvantaged character.

DESPONDENT SPECTATOR
Kalabash, an apprentice of Halaster found in Area 2, once 
summoned a spectator to guard his chambers. The 
duration of their pact, 101 years, has elapsed and now it 
roams Undermountain looking for something better to do. 
Once the adventurers find it, it explains:
"My summoner… Did not make it to the 'final round' of 
his master's precious game, as it were. The poor fool's 
been trapped in a pocket dimension for centuries, well 
over our agreed pact of a hundred and one years. Now… 
Now I am whittling away the days, as you lesser creatures
are fond of saying."
The spectator wants nothing more than a purpose. It will 
not, however, follow the adventurers. 

XANATHAR SENDS ITS REGARDS
If the adventurers rampaged through the guild's outposts 
on the first level of Undermountain, and left witnesses to 
describe them, the guild quickly musters up a reckoning. 
They send word to the nearest outpost (in the expanded 
dungeon) which sends a goblin assassin to murder the 
adventurers.

It takes the better part of a day for word to reach the 

next outpost and for the assassin to be dispatched. Thus, 
the assassin finds the adventurers only if the party takes a 
long rest. During that time, the goblin assimilates into the 
bazaar and awaits their return; or, if the adventurers are 
staying at the inn (see the additional amenities outlined in 
the Goblin Bazaar), it attacks while they rest. If the 
adventurers have already left the bazaar, the goblin waits 
there until convinced they won't return and takes to 
stalking them through the halls. 

When the assassin makes its first strike, it whispers, 

"Xanathar sends its regards." This agent has the statistics 
of an assassin with the following racial traits:
• It is a Small-sized creature with a speed of 25 ft. 
• It can read, write, and speak Goblin. 
• It can take the Hide or Disengage action as a bonus 

action on each of its turns. 

AREAS OF NOTE

The following areas of the Arcane Chambers are of note:
THE GOBLIN BAZAAR
While by default, forty goblins are crammed into a 
handful of rooms, you have the opportunity to expand on 
the goblin bazaar, turning it into an entire village. Meager 
it may be, but it can still be a shard of civilization in these 
dark depths—and how often do adventurers get to assist 
goblins instead of murdering them?

If the bazaar is expanded, it includes the following 

amenities that the adventurers are sure to appreciate:

Bathhouse. The Melairkyn dwarves fashioned a 

chamber of stone basins and spigots that fill with steaming 
hot water drawn from unseen springs below. To bathe, a 
character must pay 1 sp per hour. At any time, there are 
1d6 + 1 male goblins leering at 1d4 female goblins. 

Inn. A chamber, 40 feet by 30, has been renovated into 

an inn with bedrolls, scavenged from dead adventurer's 
packs, scattered about the room. The goblins charge 5 sp 
per guest per night. 

Fighter "Pit." The goblins spar in a nearby chamber 

using blunted weapons (dealing 1d4 bludgeoning 
damage) while others bet on the outcome. The room has
no pit, but everyone is polite enough to ignore what its 
founder named it. 

Tavern. A sitting room carved by the Melairkyn 

dwarves features cracked stone tables, shelves, and a bar 
stocked with whatever alcohol the goblins can scavenge. 
There is one cask from Garrux's Brewery (Area 22) that 
former adventurers rolled back to the bazaar and sold. The 
goblins happily tell anyone where to find more and 
promise 40 gp per barrel.

1A. BAZAAR SIDE ENTRANCE
Once the party clamber down from L1, read:
As you descend to the second level of Undermountain, 
you find yourself at a junction. Hammers fall against 
wood in the distance as the halls come alive with a 
guttural language sprinkled with cuss words from various 
languages—Orcish, Dwarvish, Common. Dozens of 
voices are packed together in these tight halls, clearly 
arguing with the sort of zeal you find at a dockside 
brothel. 

1E. YEK THE TALL
Sitting on a makeshift throne is a man: a handsome human 
with golden locks and sharp features. He brandishes a 
grimy, handheld mirror—the better to admire himself 
with. As you approach, his guards, goblins and bugbears, 
hang back, ready for violence but clearly not pining for it.

In the corner, one ugly son of a bitch lies chained—a 

beardless dwarf, his copper-orange hair like fire in the 
torchlight and his eyes bloated with indignation. 


39

Yek, vain as he is now, has had a shift in his priorities. No 
longer does he clamor for war or prosperity, but the status 
quo. He is content with his new beauty while his tribe 
continues to eke out a meager life in these depths. He is 
not too consumed, however, to know that his people are 
sandwiched between a Zhentarim-aligned wererat gang 
and the Xanathar Guild; he may ask the adventurers to 
destroy one or the other. 

Shaved Dwarf. DotMM doesn't detail the cause of 

Copper Stormforge's imprisonment, but it can be assumed 
it was theft. The adventurers may parley for his freedom 
with Yek by paying for the cost of the stolen items (24 gp) 
and succeeding on a DC 12 Charisma (Persuasion) check. 
On a success, the goblin boss decides that shaving 
Copper's beard is "punishment enough, so that all who 
look on his ugly mug know him to be a thief." Since his 
transformation into a human, Yek has preferred "human-
talk," which is to say big words.

HALLETH'S REVENGE
If Halleth Garke is present, he wrings Copper's thick little 
neck. Nothing can deny him this pleasure. Read:
The dwarf recoils at the sight of the revenant. "H-
Halleth?" he chokes out. 

The dead elf grins, his eyeball dangling by a thin rope 

of flesh. "It's me, Copper. You thought you could cheat 
me not once, but twice—but there won't be a third."

The revenant stalks forward as the dwarf struggles in 

his chains, calling for help, any help, pleading for the 
goblins—petrified, these goblins are as a knight of death 
marches forward—and with his last breath before those 
cold hands wrap around his throat, the dwarf prays to the 
gods for mercy… but his prayer is reduced to a gurgling 
litany as Halleth Garke embraces him one last time.

It's slow and it's loud. The dwarf's eyes bug out as the 

revenant chokes away the last vestige of life and light
from Copper Stormforge's eyes. The bones dance beneath 
Halleth's fingers, cracking like the first thunder of spring.

"Well then," the elf says, rising. "One down, two to go."

SPECIAL EVENTS
You can use the following two events to portray the story 
of Level 2 & 3 of Undermountain, preferably in this order:

AZROK'S AMBASSADOR
Thunder consumes the hall. Goblins everywhere pause 
and ponder. A crowd forms that is quickly split in twain 
as a platoon of armored men march into the bazaar. A 
banner bobs in the windless dungeon: a bloody handprint 
inside a hollow red triangle on a sheet of yellow flesh. 

The sergeant shouts a guttural word, and the platoon 

halts. A man marches alongside the left flank and removes 
his helm: a hobgoblin riddled with old scars. In that 
guttural tongue, he addresses the petrified masses.

The Legion of Azrok (see L3) has sent a squad of ten
hobgoblins to recruit soldiers for their war with the drow. 
Characters that speak Goblin can understand the 
hobgoblin captain that demands an audience with the 
goblin leader, Yek. Otherwise, a character that succeeds 
on a DC 16 Wisdom (Insight) check can intuit that the 
captain is here to recruit soldiers and collect supplies, 
given the banners and wagons of bloodied arms and armor 
carted in by the hobgoblins.

Desperate for aid, all racial divisions have been erased 

between goblinoid and man. The captain can speak 
broken Common and will relay the following information 
to characters that ask. 
• The "vile" drow of House Auvryndar wage unfettered 

war against the "peace-loving" hobgoblins of the 
Legion of Azrok, who claimed the ruins of 
Stromkuhldur as their home years ago.

• Warlord Azrok ("an honorable warrior and savior of our 

people") has issued a call-to-arms, promising glory and 
gold to those that aid the Legion, regardless of race.

Characters that heed the call receive a visa of sorts that 
will grant them safe passage through Stromkuhldur: a 
small stone painted with a bloody handprint. 

While the most direct route to L3 is through House 

Auvryndar's territory, the hobgoblin squad navigated the 
Expanded Dungeon until they reached the Arcane 
Chambers. The squad will return by that route. If the 
adventurers wish to travel with the squad, the captain 
requires they swear an oath to meet first with Warlord 
Azrok—an oath the adventurers should not take likely. If 
they agree and follow the squad (who leave tomorrow 
morning) then they can instead start L3 in Area 22. The 
journey is long and arduous and takes four days. 

FLIGHT OF THE WERERAT
To organically present the feud between Rizzeryl's gang 
and the Xanathar Guild, you can use the following events, 
preferably after the Azrok's Ambassador event.

A human (a wererat) by the name of Dannoth is 

purchasing rations in the bazaar when he's apprehended 
by a cloaked bugbear. Dannoth escapes by shapeshifting 
into a rat. Read the following:
You hear a tangle of shouts as tins and rations clatter to 
the stone floor. Two figures struggle: a burly, cloaked 
man has snatched up a scrawny human from behind. As 
the chaos unfurls, the human bites down on his assailant's 
forearm and utilizes that distraction to shapeshift into a 
rat. His flesh melts and contracts into a foul critter that 
scampers off between the tattered stalls.
Dannoth attempts to escape. The adventurers can pursue 
him, following the urban chase rules (see Chapter 8, 
Dungeon Master's Guide). If caught, he pleads for his life, 
presenting himself as pathetic and squalid as possible—
and utilizes the first moment to escape again. 


40

THE ARCANE CHAMBERS
The following areas outside the bazaar are of note. 

2. KALABASH'S CHAMBERS
Here the adventurers get their first glimpse into what sort 
of macabre fate awaits those that dare study under the 
Mad Mage—and fail to meet his standards.

2A. WATER PUMP
Water trickles from a faucet, breaking what would 
otherwise be silence as it drips into a vast stone basin. Its 
hand pump is crusty with rust and slumped over the 
basin's lid is a goblin's corpse. A bucket lies nearby, its 
water spilled. 
The goblin was sent by the bazaar to collect fresh water. 
Hearing the sounds of cookery and smelling delectable 
food, the goblin wandered into Area 2C where it fell for 
Halaster's trap. The specter in the kitchen woke and 
animated the pots and pans, which chased the poor goblin 
to Area 2A, bludgeoning him to death before returning to 
the kitchen. Close inspection of the goblin's corpse 
reveals several bruises over its body and a caved-in skull.

The Ingredient: Love. While the adventurers are here, 

a spell of Halaster's is in play: they can smell roasted meat 
and freshly baked bread which get their stomach's 
rumbling. 

2B. ABANDONED LABORATORY
This chamber, clearly an alchemical laboratory, is choked 
with dust. Grimy vials and alembics sit unused on rusted 
iron tables. Ingredients have rotted on the shelves and in 
their bottles. Can nothing be salvaged?
Disturbing the equipment alerts the specter in Area 2C. 
The risk may be worth the reward, however:

Additional Loot. Close, noisy inspection of the 

alchemical supplies reveals three potions of healing, and 
a philter of love whose true nature can easily be missed, 
leading to some goofy shenanigans. 

2C. WIZARD'S KITCHEN
As a variant, the kitchen can be under an illusion of the 
Mad Mage's—or the specter's—making. It looks clean 
and fresh; the stew in the cook pot is irresistibly 
delectable. Only when a character takes an action to study 
the kitchen (making a DC 16 Intelligence (Investigation) 
check) can it begin to suspect that this is an illusion. On a 
success, it can see how decrepit the kitchen truly is. 

Once the specter is slain, the illusion shatters. 

2D. KALABASH'S BEDROOM
Kalabash has been driven insane by centuries of 
isolation—yawn. Consider the following variant: replace 
Kalabash with an allip from Mordenkainen's Tome of 
Foes, the statblock of which has been provided in 
Appendix B. 

The pocket dimension Halaster confined Kalabash in 

was furnished with all the tools the mage would need to 
continue his research, undistracted from ale… But, 
desperate to escape, Kalabash instead sought to blackmail 
the Mad Mage. He sought out ancient lore that Halaster 
had protected with a curse. Learning this lore annihilated 
Kalabash's body, leaving only a wisp of his scorched spirit 
which now seeks to end its torment by passing on that 
knowledge—a long and arduous campaign of maddened 
whispering that is. 

What was the lore that Kalabash discovered? That the 

Mad Mage cannot die. That no matter what, days after his 
death, he shall reform in a new body with a mind that has 
once again witnessed its own destruction. The Mad Mage 
cursed this knowledge, fearing that if it were known that 
he could cheat death, forces equal or greater in power to 
him would band together to imprison him once and for all.

Halaster's curse prevents Kalabash from explicitly 

telling any soul this secret; he can only pass it on as all 
allips do: by tormenting some poor mind into recording 
that lore. Unfortunately for him, the curse forces him to 
write only in a vast cipher, which takes 30 days of steady 
scribing, and a DC 22 Intelligence (Investigation) check 
to crack, after which Kalabash is freed from his torment. 

If Kalabash is released, the spirit visibly enters a rotted 

tome in his chambers, hoping that someone will pick it up. 
If they do, the spirit whispers to them ceaselessly, 
animating them to write, and write, and write…

3. HALASTER PUPPET

HALASTER'S GAME
"We asked one hundred adventurers, 'What do you dread 
most while dungeon delving?' Name a response!"
Halaster's puppet is imbued with a fragment of his 
master's magic and uses an augmented telekinesis spell 
(spell save DC 22) to divide the adventurers into two 
teams, each standing at separate ends of the room. It then 
manifests a table before it with two buttons, each glowing 
red, and instructs them that they will play a single round 
of "Delver Dance." If they move from where it placed 
them, it promises to "roast this cavern like a fine pig."

Rules of the Game. The puppet explains the rules (in 

short, it's modified Family Feud with a twist): each team 
sends a "champion" to answer the question described 
below. At the start of the round, both champions roll 
initiative; the quicker one hits the buzzer first and can 
supply answers until all eight correct answers have been 
provided, or up until three mistakes have been made, after 
which the other champion can "steal." 

The opposing champion has one chance to provide a 

correct answer, winning the points of all previous answers 
if correct. If the champion is wrong, the first team totals 
its points from the previous answers. The team can still
answer questions but start with zero points. After three 
mistakes, the round ends. 


41

WHAT DO YOU DREAD MOST IN A DUNGEON?
# Pts Answer
# Pts Answer

1
24 Mimics
5
11
Returning Home

2
23 Absence of loot
6
6
Mind Flayers

3
18 Undead
7
5
Drow

4
12 Adventurers
8
1
The Mad Mage

Consequences. Halaster's puppet assures them that 

whichever team loses will be fireballed. It's an empty 
threat: the puppet can't cast that spell. 

The X-Factor. A teammate can volunteer to drink "the 

X-Factor," a vial of indiscernible liquid that the puppet 
provides. If they do so, whether they survive the 
imbibement or not, they give their team 10d6 points. The 
vial is a poison that deals 6d6 poison damage on 
imbibement and subjects the imbiber to a DC 16 
Constitution saving throw; on a failure, they are poisoned 
for 10 minutes. 

Prize. The winner of the game gains what appears to be 

a handful of stickers. These stickers portray various 
expressions on Halaster's face. 

Answers. The results of the survey are broken down 

above. The number of points won are equal to the number 
of people that answered. 

7. SHOCKING DISCOVERIES
Behold: Frankenstein and her monster.

Log Entries. This area requires little changes except 

one: it seems a bit outlandish that all it took was three days 
for Trenzia to tire so much so of her fellow apprentices, 
as described in the log entry found in Area 7B. Consider 
changing it from "Day 3" to "Day 34." Or, even better, 
"Day 362."

Additional Loot. Characters that search Area 7C can 

find 1d4 + 1 potions of healing and two potions of 
lightning resistance. 

11. MIDNA'S LAIR
By default, Midna sends living unseen servants to attack 
intruders—that's a recipe for her early death. Instead 
consider the following variant:

Variant. Midna is no fool. Rather than have her order 

this invisible legion to bludgeon her foes, it's suggested 
that she merely waits out the adventurers or attempts to 
ingratiate herself to them, knowing that she fares almost 
no chance by herself in these wretched halls. She uses 
them to either escape back to Waterdeep—stealing what 
she can from their packs—or prevail to Skullport where 
she hopes to find work as a mercenary. 

HALLETH'S REVENGE
If Halleth Garke, the revenant, is with the party, he chases 
Midna down and throttles her to death. Read:
"Midna," the revenant calls, a lazy grin on his tattered 
face. The bruises stand out like violet beacons. "Midna, 
my dear… It's time to pay the piper."

The priestess recognizes the corpse and recoils. "You… 

No, no, gods no, you… You can't be…"

"I am," says the elf. "Reckoning has come. Your 

reckoning."

"Stay back!" she shouts, kindling radiant fire in her 

palm—but the revenant cares not and marches on even as 
the bolts of holy flame are hurled at his wretched body. 
"Back!" she screams, but there's no use. There's no 
negotiating with the reaper. 

The revenant closes the distance, and gently cups one 

of the two the holy symbols at her neck—the symbol of 
Waukeen. "My Lady, my goddess, I give unto you this 
tithe. Do with her what you will."

"Halleth, please, I didn't mean you any h—"
The priestess's cries are cut short as the revenant closes 

both hands around her throat and snaps her neck like a dry 
branch. Her body ragdolls to the floor—but not before 
Halleth snatches back the symbol of his deity and adorns 
himself with her divine icon.
Variant. Reclaiming his holy symbol is, as written in 
DotMM, enough to prematurely end Halleth's quest for 
vengeance—but that… That isn't gothic enough. Ignore it 
at your leisure if you wish your adventurers to witness 
Halleth brutally murdering Rex the Hammer, if he hasn't 
done so already.  

13. MUTATED APPRENTICES
In these wretched halls roam gibbering mouthers and 
nothics—a testament to the madness of Halaster 
Blackcloak and the insidious seed planted deep below 
Undermountain that afflicts all that stay here. 

Ambiance. If you play on Roll20, or use YouTube, you 

can search "gibbering mouther" and let that manic noise 
wash over your table. 

Nothics. The nothics tell the adventurers, "The seed 

shall bear bitter fruit. Already we see it in you." They refer 
to Weave Addiction. See HG, Dungeon Overview for 
more details on this predicament. 

Mezzoloth. It can be assumed that the mezzoloth here 

was hired by Halaster Blackcloak, not enslaved. Do 
remember it has four arms—all the more to grapple 
someone with!


42

HALLETH'S REVENGE
If Halleth Garke, the revenant, is present, he immediately 
springs to Rex's defense, slaying the monsters—for none 
will deprive Garke of his vengeance. Once the enemies 
have been dispatched, Rex realizes who this creature is 
and recoils. Read the following:
As the last of your foes fall, the revenant turns—in all his 
grisly beauty—from the corpses to the wounded warrior. 
His voice is cold. "Rex, old friend. Old, dear, Rex. I never 
did get to give you a fair farewell."

Horror mounts behind the warrior's eyes, but it's quickly 

tamed. "You… Do it, you ugly son of a bitch. Get it—"

Without any grace, Halleth Garke leaps onto the 

warrior, pounding his blackened fists into the man's 
temple, raining blows upon his body to the music of 
broken bones and cries of pain until the two finally still.
If this is the last survivor of the Fine Fellows of 
Daggerford, Kelim the Weasel notwithstanding, Halleth 
Garke's disintegrates into dust that crashes down upon 
Rex's broken body.

14. BASE DE RÉSISTANCE
Rizzeryl, the drow mage, casts greater invisibility on 
himself when he hears intruders. If asked why, he assures 
it's for his own safety. If the adventurers ingratiated 
themselves to Dannoth the wererat (see "Special Events" 
in the Goblin Bazaar above), Rizzeryl feigns trust after the 
wererat vouches for the adventurers—but secretly the elf 
does anything but. 

REBELS AND PATRIOTS
The picture Rizzeryl paints is one of tyranny and 
righteous resistance: that Skullport ("an ancient bastion of 
freedom") has been oppressed by the Xanathar Guild for 
too long. The people long for an end to the beholder's 
regime, apparently, and Rizzeryl is one of the few left 
willing to fight. His task, for now, is simple: destroy the 
Xanathar Guild outposts here on Level 2. They are led by:
• Nadia the Unbent, a "brute of a woman with a penchant 

for violence; she took an axe as her husband and war 
was her dowry." 

• Shunn Shurreth, a "spider-faced drow cursed by the 

demon goddess Lolth—his mandibles tremble for the 
taste of fresh blood."
What Lies Ahead. Rizzeryl knows the following 

information about Level 3, but he won't share it unless 
he's magically compelled or tortured. 
• Level 3, "the dwarven ruins of Stromkuhldur," is the site 

of a guerrilla war between a hobgoblin legion and 
House 
Auvryndar. 
The 
River 
Sargauth 
leads 

downstream to Skullport, a den of scum and villainy 
currently under the thumb of the Xanathar Guild. The 
drow hope to seize it. 

• The drow of Level 3 are led by the sadistic T'rissa 

Auvryndar, a priestess of Lolth. Her mission is to seize 
Stromkuhldur, and failure is not an option. 

VARIANT: SAFE PASSAGE
If the adventurers assist Rizzeryl, he can provide them a 
broach of House Auvryndar and a letter that he guarantees 
will grant them safe passage through the areas controlled 
by the drow on Level 3. 
"Without this, you're as good as dead," he says, "and trust 
me, you'd rather be dead than enslaved." 
While he's loath to reveal his allegiance, if it will 
guarantee the demise of the Xanathar Guild, he's willing 
to share it. Unfortunately for the adventurers, the 
treacherous drow will not honor this promise. As a male, 
Rizzeryl has no authority in his house, and the adventurers 
are sure to be captured and sacrificed to Lolth.

Rizzeryl, for his part, is deluded enough to think his 

promise will be honored. A character that succeeds on a 
DC 17 Wisdom (Insight) check can perceive a hint of 
doubt in the drow, however. 

21. ANIMATED BALLISTAE
Wood groans like an old man—and out from the gloom 
lumber two animated ballistae on hinged legs. Almost like 
mouths, they rack back their bolts, and fire kindles like 
the maw of some minute hell. 
See animated ballista in Appendix B of this supplement 
for a more concise portrayal of statistics.

22. GARRUX'S BREWERY
Only one creature inhabits the brewery: a beholder 
zombie. The complex is otherwise empty. However, you 
can add 2d6 + 2 dwarf skeletons who otherwise continue 
to brew ale as they did in life; Halaster could conjure hops 
and other necessary ingredients. However, most barrels 
are beyond disrepair and the dwarves merely brew ale just 
for it to leak out of faulty casks. The skeletons remain 
passive unless attacked or their equipment and ale is 
stolen. 

22A. ALE DISPENSER
When a character opens the sixth spigot, a patch of green 
slime spills out.

Green Slime, Abridged. A creature within 5 feet of the 

pipe must make a DC 10 Dexterity save, otherwise the 
slime falls on it. The creature takes 5 (1d10) acid damage 
and then again at the start of its turns until the slime is 
scraped off or destroyed. Any nonmagical wood or metal 
object used to scrape it off is effectively destroyed. 
Sunlight, any effect that cures disease, and any effect that 
deals cold, fire, or radiant damage, destroys the patch of 
slime.


43

22B. "BREWERS ONLY!"
When the adventurers enter this room, a spell laid by 
Halaster can activate, speaking to them. Read:
A voice whispers from the lintel above the door. The 
voice of the Mad Mage himself:

"The dwarves rejoiced in these halls. Busied themselves 

with ale and dreams. Then I came. And all would be mine. 
Everything below the mountain is mine. Even you."

22C. ALE VATS
Most of the vats lie empty, whatever brew they once held 
having long since evaporated… But as you inspect those 
yet filled, you feel the attention of something. The Mad 
Mage, perhaps? Scrying on you?

You look about the gloom and find nothing, returning 

your attention to the vat—something plops in the water. 
Before you can even pull back, the fetid waters rush as a 
fanged maw opens beneath the surface and out from the 
depths rises a beholder's corpse. Ancient ale and foul 
water falls from its rotten flesh in a shower as it smiles at 
you hungrily. 

22D. BARREL RUN
In the highly unlikely event that the entire party is trapped 
in the pit traps without thieves' tools or the magic needed
to escape, consider the following:

Destruction. The pit lids have an AC of 15, a damage 

threshold of 5, immunity to poison and psychic damage, 
resistance to piercing and slashing damage, and 25 HP. 

Salvation. At the start of every day, roll a d20. On a roll 

of 11-20, a chaotic neutral adventuring party stumbles 
across this area, activating the pit traps. On a roll of 16-
20, they too actually have the means to escape (thieves' 
tools or the knock spell prepared).

25. CREATURE STORAGE
Mist chokes these chambers. Off in the distance you hear 
metal striking stone—slow, methodical, perfectly 
consistent. As you approach, you catch sight of a cuboid 
contraption 
with 
spindly 
limbs 
marching 
in 
a 

counterclockwise circle. 

HALASTRON
Your players are sure to gawk at the modron, only to be 
disappointed when they learn it can't speak Common. 
Unless you know an adventurer has comprehend 
languages, consider allowing Halastron the ability to 
converse in the broken Common he's learned from the 
Mad Mage. If you do so, he is fond of the phrases below, 
and uses them at the most inappropriate times, as the 
modron is still learning mortal social cues and behavior. 
Every encounter with adventurers, then, is another 
opportunity to expand its skills. 

Halastron also openly explains its "directive" assigned 

by the Mad Mage, as outlined in the its description in Area 
25A. 

HALASTRON'S FAVORED PHRASES

d8 Phrase
1
"That's show business for ya."

2
"Shut up, baby, I know it."

3
"Rejoice—you are all gears in the machine."

4
"Extinction is inevitable. Live it up while you can."

5
"Neat."

6
"0-1-1-0-1-0-0-0   0-1-1-0-1-0-0-1."

7
"I can dig it." / "Can you dig it?"

8
"Bite my shiny, extraplanar ass."

LIFELIKE STATUES
For the sake of brevity, the statistics of the petrified 
creatures have not been included in this supplement, 
unlike other monsters and NPCs found on Level 2. It's 
also unlikely that the adventurers have the means to 
transport a statue without severely exerting themselves—
the Mad Mage relies on a spell of telekinesis, for example. 
Even the smallest could weigh hundreds of pounds. In the 
event that the adventurers do try to move a statue 
manually, it requires a combined Strength score of 20 or 
higher. After moving a statue, each character must make 
a DC 20 Constitution saving throw or gain one level of 
Exhaustion. The DC is lowered by 2 for every character 
that aids in transport, up to a maximum reduction of 8.

26. ANCIENT ELVEN TOMB
Unnatural mist roils in these ancient chambers, bucking 
and drifting between long-forgotten sarcophagi. It's cold 
and in the immediate distance beasts slaver and rage at 
their lot in this pitiful life. 
The two owlbears here attack immediately—but while 
the first charges out from the mist, the other skulks 
between sarcophagi, emerging to strike at the flank of the 
adventurers. 

I AM ROOT
Trust that your players are going to want their own 
awakened shrub—now, not later. Consider changing it so 
that someone, a previous adventuring party perhaps, 
planted a shrub in the pot of awakening thirty days ago 
and now the awakened shrub is about to be born. Dollars 
to donuts, your players will name it "Root." 

An awakened shrub speaks one language known by its 

creator; Common, in this case. For maximum comedy, 
disallow the shrub from saying anything but its name—
though the adventurers can discern certain meanings from 
that single phrase, much like a beloved character from an 
insanely popular movie franchise play.


44

EPILOGUE

Once the adventurers find the path to Level 3, they should 
ascend to 7th level. 

Choose between the following two narrations:

THE STANDARD SEND-OFF
Once again you have faced the mythic horrors of 
Undermountain and emerged scarred but victorious. You 
know that there are greater challenges and viler horrors 
ahead but together you shall prevail. 
If the adventurers encountered the Fine Fellows of 
Daggerford and learned of their dark history, add:
"Together." That's the operative word. The Fine Fellows 
of Daggerford, those desperate fools, splintered and only 
then found their doom. Together they were strong, and 
alone they were nothing more than mewling curs waiting 
in line for the abattoir. So long as you stand together, 
nothing can ever tear you down. The depths await you, 
adventurers.

HALASTER'S GAME: THE HOST'S SEND-OFF
Halaster telepathically communicates this to the party as 
they descend to Level 3 of Undermountain: 
A voice blooms from deep within your skulls:

"And so, our contestants persevere in the face of their 

countless shortcomings, saying goodbye to the Arcane 
Chambers and hello to the dwarven ruins of 
Stromkuhldur—but, we wonder, can they weather the 
storm of spiders and venom that is House Auvryndar? Can 
they escape the wretched drow? Or shall they too become 
pregnant with the demon goddess's foul children? 

"Find out this and more next time on Dungeon of the 

Mad Mage!"
Halaster gleefully provides names House Auvryndar, as 
he hopes to eradicate the drow from his dungeon. By 
warning the adventurers, he hedges his bet that they can 
strike a crippling blow against the elves. 


45

LEVEL III: THE SARGAUTH LEVEL

"Welcome back everybody, to Dungeon of the Mad Mage. 
Tonight's to be a fine episode. A fine episode indeed…" –
the Mad Mage to his audience, whomever that may be

QUICK NOTES
•
L3 is consumed by a war between the drow of House 
Auvryndar and the goblinoid Legion of Azrok. The 
players will blunder into Auvryndar's web first.

•
The Legion of Azrok is not hostile to the party. Don't 
fall into the usual trap of "goblinoids always attack 
others." This level is designed to buck that stereotype.  

•
This level is an exploratory one pocked with satellite 
threats that otherwise keep to themselves. Refresh 
yourself with areas 8, 10, and 12. 

•
The adventurers can progress to Skullport rather than 
immediately pushing on to L4, the Twisted Caverns. 
There they can rest and resupply for a few days. It's 
worth the detour. 

PREVIOUSLY ON DUNGEON OF THE MAD MAGE
There are a few considerations from levels above that you 
need to keep in mind when running this chapter:

Kelim the Weasel. If he's been accompanying the party 

since Level 1 of Undermountain, it's recommended that 
you use this chapter to kill Kelim off. He'll make a great 
incubator for spider eggs.

Azrok's Ambassador. If you ran the special event in 

Companion Ch. 2, the party may have a visa (a stone 
painted with a bloodied handprint) they can brandish 
towards the hobgoblins to get safe passage. 

ADDITIONAL LOOT
Additional loot has been added to this dungeon level. 
Include it at your discretion. 

THE CENTRAL CONFLICT
The Sargauth Level—better described as the Ruins of 
Stromkuhldur—is marked by a bitter war between the 
desperate Legion of Azrok and the capricious drow of 
House Auvryndar. The adventurers are thrown straight 
into the conflict as the path from Level 3 leads them right 
into drow territory—right to the boss's lair. 

There is a risk, however: by coming to blows with the 

drow, they're likely to meet T'rissa, the boss of this 
level—and defeat her prematurely. While introducing the 
villain is great for narrative, T'rissa is far too weak to 
withstand the adventurers with the current guards she has 
unless the party is already wounded. Sometimes 
summarily executing a boss is a great story twist, but in 
this case it's anticlimactic. Imagine your adventurers 
meeting Warlord Azrok after killing T'rissa. Yawn.

Thus, you want to split this level into three acts: 

First Blows. The adventurers wander into drow 

territory, seeing the tell-tale signs of torture and spider 
webs. They venture too far, meet T'rissa, and are defeated, 
stabilized, and impregnated with spider eggs—a lethal 
birth, that'll be.

Escape the Drow. The clock's already ticking when the 

adventurers wake. They must break free from their silken 
bonds and escape these vile chambers.

Azrok's Day. The adventurers explore the Sargauth 

level, looking for the way to the next level of 
Undermountain until they meet the hobgoblins of Azrok's 
Legion. They're compelled to meet the warlord, who asks 
them for aid in defeating the drow.

HALASTER'S GAME
The Mad Mage intends to insert the adventurers into the 
conflict for the sake of ratings. He issues a challenge to 
the party—the "highlight" of tonight's episode. 

As the adventurers begin to explore the level, the Mad 

Mage arrests their progress and casts them into a pocket 
dimension. This preferably occurs after they've visited 
Area 3 or while they're in Area 18, but before they reach 
Area 4 or 5. Essentially, have this event occur early in the 
level, before they ever face House Auvryndar's forces. 

Once you're ready to issue this quest, read:

The cavern doesn't shift, but utterly disappears without a 
single sound. Without flash or bang—no commotion at 
all. Where there was once cold stone now stands a 
boundless dimension wreathed in mist and fire-cast 
shadow. Reality has not even melted but been completely 
replaced without any fanfare whatsoever. 

Freestanding bookcases flank a roaring fireplace, and 

sitting beside it, in a high-backed chair, is Halaster 
Blackcloak himself. 

He lowers his book—Blades of Brass by Walt 

Whitdwarf—and hails you: "Contestants! Triumph! 
Glory! Inevitable death! These await you, but come, stay 
awhile and listen."

Before you can even consider fleeing, a force plucks 

you, placing you before the hearth, before Halaster. He 
shuts his tome and smiles. 

"You've descended to the ruins of Stromkuhldur, 

bastion of the ancient Melairkyn dwarves. Here they eked 
out their small, little lives. Bright lives in the darkness… 
Before the darkness swallowed them whole. To this day 
the veterans of that ancient war lay siege to these ruins. 
The vile drow of House Auvryndar war against the Legion 
of Azrok for control of these ruins so that they may seize 
Skullport, perhaps even Waterdeep itself. It's up to you to 
strike at the drow—or leave them to their devices. History 
has shown them to be a stubborn, sadistic lot, so I'm sure 
it'll all work out."


46

Halaster provides no other information other than that a 
legion of hobgoblins has claimed this land as theirs but 
were forced to give it up with nary a fight; as well that the 
drow are voracious and led by a priestess named T'rissa 
Auvryndar, who has orders to secure this level for her 
noble house. He does not disclose their locations either.

Time seemingly stands still while the adventurers are in 

this pocket dimension. However, if they ask Halaster, he 
informs them that their perception of time has been so 
rapidly increased that, after they leave, only four seconds 
will have passed. He remarks, "You're all standing there, 
slack-jawed and vulnerable. Just like any other day, eh?"

The Game and its Prize. Halaster's quest is simple: kill 

T'rissa Auvryndar (see A6) and rout her forces in what 
Halaster calls "Drow Town" (A20). They must then cast 
T'rissa's holy symbol of Lolth into the River Sargauth. He 
promises a reward of "great power" if they succeed. If 
they succeed, Halaster appears on the ferry described in 
A13. Read the following: 
You cast the holy symbol of the Spider Queen into the 
river—good riddance. You look about: the Mad Mage 
promised to meet you, if you held up your end of the 
bargain. And so, you wait. You wait, and wait, and wait, 
until when it's come time to finally quit this place, you 
catch sight of a black gondola poling from upstream. 

A black-robed figure with a horned, skeletal face poles 

the gondola along the current… and standing there, 
grinning ear to ear, is the Mad Mage. His claps are like 
thunder as he shouts, "Well done, well done! I never 
believed in you, and you made it through anyway! Well 
done, indeed!" 
When it comes time to pay them their reward, Halaster 
visibly draws out a handful of dice and casts them into the 
air where they roll and stop naturally. On an even result, 
he rewards them with a quaal's feather token (swan boat), 
described in Appendix A of this supplement. On an odd 
result, he tells them, "Self-respect is the greatest power of 
all" and winks out of existence.
AREAS OF NOTE

The following areas are of note:

1. CATACOMBS
A chill haunts these catacombs. The walls themselves are 
carved with the imagery of mountains and Dwarvish 
script and are marbled with the veins of glittering 
minerals. The tombs—testaments to the bitter end of the 
Melairkyn clan—line the walls like shelves, each bearing 
a symbol: a mountain with a gem at its heart. 
A character that reads Dwarvish can translate the script: 
"To ancestors past, we salute. To sons and daughters, we 
beg." Characters that succeed on a DC 13 Intelligence 
(Religion) check recognize the religious symbols as that 
of Dumathoin, a dwarven patron god of mining and 
exploration and the protector of the dwarven dead.

2. DEAD EXPLORER
Rotting in a corner of the cavern is a human's corpse. 
What's left of his face is twisted into a silent scream. 
Once a character makes a DC 13 Wisdom (Medicine) 
check, also add:
Grisly wounds mar the corpse: bites, dried blood, viscera. 
On his neck, the skin has peeled outward—perhaps 
something emerged from within. You shudder.
Additional Loot. Characters that loot the corpse find a coil 
of rope, 30 feet long; a small coinpurse containing 3 gp 
and 12 sp; a dagger with a dried substance coating it 
(spider blood); and a small golden locket with an inlaid 
portrait depicting an elven man (worth 15 gp). A frequent 
patron of the Yawning Portal of Waterdeep will recognize 
the elf as a one Auron Silverleaf, a former adventurer. He 
would be grateful for the return of the locket and the news 
of his lover’s ultimate fate. 

3. GRICK AMBUSH
Rubble is strewn through the chamber, granting the 
gricks advantage on Stealth checks. The predators wait 
until the party is half way through the chamber before 
attacking. 

5. HOUSE AUVRYNDAR
The drow have claimed these areas as their own. Your 
goal is to use this area to foreshadow the conflict between 
the goblinoids and drow that the adventurers are now 
embroiled in. 

5A. WELCOMING COMMITTEE
Remember that quaggoths have a climbing speed and a +5 
to Athletics. If they’ve been alerted to intruders, have 
them cling to broken bits of the chamber, or support 
themselves in corners in the room, ready to leap down on 
intruders. 

5C. PRISON
The hall reeks of filth and excrement. It's lined with prison 
cells and infested with savage men that terrorize prisoners 
by raking clubs against the rusted bars. 
The following characters can be found in the prison:

Geldax. The human commoner has been reduced to a 

mewling cur and is desperate to see the sun again. If freed, 
he becomes a liability and would never survive through 
Levels 1 and 2. His only hope is to reach Skullport and 
eke out a meager life in that subterranean town. 

Lurrash. The hobgoblin is stoic in the face of his 

coming torture and inevitable death. Duty has prevailed 
over self-preservation. He tells the adventurers, “If you 
cannot save me from this cell, save my people from these 
vile elves. Seek out Azrok’s Hold, the bastion of our 
people—find Warlord Azrok. He will grant you safe 
passage should you assist our people in this desperate 
hour.”


47

Drow. The famished, wounded elves are trying to one-

up each other. When they first see the adventurers, one 
whispers, “Hey! You! Outsiders! C’mere!” If a character 
approaches, roll initiative. The first drow stabs at a 
character (+4 to hit, 1d4+2 piercing damage) and then 
dances back. The next two drow fire their hand 
crossbows, but not before saying, “Well, I can do better 
than that,” and “T’rissa’s love shall be mine, fool. Watch 
this.”

5D. SUN ELF
A stunning elven maiden lies in chains and tattered robes. 
Bloody lashes mar her back, and she looks to you with a 
tangle of suspicion and hope.
Marta’s “Story.” Marta provides the following tall-tale, 
so as to inspire the sympathy of these fools: captured on 
the high seas by pirates, Marta was taken to Skullport, 
where she was auctioned off as a handmaid for Skull 
Island, the fortress at the heart of the city, but she was 
abducted by the drow and brought here to be tortured. 

A successful DC 20 Wisdom (Insight) check is enough 

for a character to doubt her story, and a DC 16 
Intelligence (History) check allows a character to recall 
that the pirates of Skullport had been wiped out long ago, 
replaced by duergar and bugbears. 

Marta’s Gambit. If freed, Marta still hopes to prove her 

worth to House Auvryndar. She betrays the adventurers at 
the most opportune moment: in combat, opening up with 
a fireball spell on the party or counterspelling a 
character’s crucial healing spell. 

6. TEMPLE OF DUMATHOIN
The temple is choked by cobwebs across which skitter 
giant arachnids. Corpses hang in cocoons like festering 
holiday decorations. Atop a dais at the far end of the hall, 
a drow priestess, dressed in flowing, ebony robes, 
presides over four other elves—leading them in prayer to 
their demon goddess, Lolth, no doubt. A foul wind 
brushes through the hall, delivering the sounds of 
struggle, fear, and pain—for lo' and behold, a figure 
writhes in his web, perhaps a sacrifice to be made to Lolth. 

PROPERLY SETTING THE SCENE 
If the adventurers turn here when they should've instead 
retreated, they'll encounter, and likely defeat, this level's 
true boss well before the story is ever rounded out. As a 
storyteller, your goal is to, well, tell a climatic story. Since 
T'rissa will stabilize fallen characters to act as spider egg 
incubators, you can afford to overwhelm the adventurers 
now by adding more forces to this room. See "Additional 
Forces" below for more information. 

If the adventurers flee, the drow give chase. See the 

Special Event "Chimaera Drift" below.

TACTICS
The drow are highly intelligent enemies and veterans of 
constant warfare. Even if surprised, they can rally into a 
defensible position and mount a fierce counterattack. As 
described in DotMM, if T'rissa defeats the adventurers, 
she does not kill them but imprisons and implants them 
with spider eggs.

T’rissa. T’rissa, despite being the highest CR character 

in this fight, is a supporter. On her first turn, the drow 
priestess of Lolth
should cast conjure animals, 

summoning 2 giant spiders, and position them as a 
vanguard. On her second turn, she ought to use her 
Summon Demon action to summon a yochlol (the 
statblock of which can be found in Appendix B). As her 
forces are wounded, her next priority should be to cast 
mass cure wounds. After this, spells of insect plague or 
web are best. 

Drow. The four drow arrange themselves in a battle 

formation to protect T’rissa. The males, inferior beings 
that they are, are expected to physically put themselves 
between the adventurers and T’rissa while the females 
remain at range. Utilize their innate spellcasting: on the 
first turn, casting faerie fire on unarmored characters; 
another two can cast darkness in patches they expect the 
giant spiders to fight in. Only after they cast these spells 
do they resort to weapons. 

Drow Mage. If the adventurers didn’t encounter him in 

Area 5A, the drow mage is here. His opening tactic 
should be to cast greater invisibility on himself or T'rissa, 
followed by casting lightning bolt or cloudkill (at the 
sacrifice of his concentration on greater invisibility) and 
keeping himself out of harm’s way via misty step. 

Giant Spiders. One giant spider uses its Web action 

while the other two drop from the ceiling. The spiders 
have blindsight, so if the drow cast darkness, the beasts 
can attack uninhibited. 

ADDITIONAL FORCES.
If your goal is to overwhelm the adventurers so as to 
capture and impregnate them with spider eggs, then on the 
second round of combat, 1d4 + 2 drow enter the room 
from Area 5, having heard the sounds of combat. On the 
fourth turn, a drow elite warrior arrives as well. 


48

WIVES OF THE SPIDER QUEEN
If the adventurers are overwhelmed, T'rissa stabilizes 
them. They awaken 1d4 hours later suspended 10 feet 
above the floor, as described in DotMM. Read:
The world slowly comes back into being. You hang about 
ten feet above the stone floor, wrapped in the arachnid 
embrace of a cocoon. You struggle feebly, hopelessly. 
Your body pulses with pain. There's poison raging in your 
veins. You can feel it there, howling, quivering, yearning
to begin its life by ending yours.

The truth, you soon realize, is far more horrifying. As 

your eyes adjust to the darkness, you make out foul shapes 
attached to your body: sacs. Sacs in which things squirm. 
Things with far too many legs. You look about the 
webbed prison and see the corpses of past victims, 
dangling and ruptured from past births. 
Halaster Blackcloak can telepathically communicate with 
the party, adding either of the following:
•
"Ah, and our contestants finally awaken, newly 
wedded to the Spider Queen. Are they doomed to die 
during childbirth? Shall they escape?"

•
"Your first mistake was losing. Your last will be not 
finding a cleric before tomorrow to rid you of this 
disease."

10. CAVES OF THE RIVER COVEN

ROLEPLAYING THE COVEN
The coven isn't in the business of subtlety and aim to toy 
with their guests by emerging from their pools. Once the 
adventurers enter Area 10C, read:
The dank cave reeks of brine and seaweed while geysers 
erupt in the distance. The walls are slick with algae and 
decorated with sea shells. Shallow pools pit the uneven 
floor like cancerous sores and as you tiptoe through the 
cavern, you can't help but wonder what lies beneath those 
darkened waters. 

Gazing long at a pool, you blink with recognition: your 

eyes meet something below the surface. Two bright eyes 
shine from below. Almost frozen, you begin to steel 
yourself—and that's when a voice floats from the pool 
directly behind you: "Welcome dear. Welcome to our 
home. Our sweet, little home."

You whirl about: a crone festooned with barnacles and 

warts smiles at you, her head poking above the surface of 
that foul pool. Immediately she dives back below. Your 
eyes fall to a rotting trout. Foul magic must animate its 
lips indeed for it croaks, "Make yourself at home."
The hags are loath to come to violence and quickly 
introduce themselves. In league with Halaster, they want 
to pit the adventurers against the drow. The adventurers 
are sure to guess they're hags and will distrust them 
immediately. No matter—this isn't the coven's first rodeo. 

The coven has concocted a tale for visitors: that they 

were cursed into these wretched forms by a sea hag 
matron now long lost to the waves. They insist that they 
want nothing but peace. The coven consists of:

Caldra Cuttlefingers. Not the youngest nor the oldest, 

Caldra acts as the diplomat. She assures the adventurers 
that they'll face no harm in these caves so long as they join 
them for a supper of oysters and raw fish. She claims to 
be a fierce adherent to the ancient Oath of Hospitality 
sworn between guest and host. A character that succeeds 
on a DC 19 Wisdom (Insight) check might sense in her a 
grain of truth.

Coral Black. Coral Black is chiefly psychotic and 

handsy. Her touch leaves a thin film of slime on any 
surface, and nothing cheers her up more than to stroke a 
character's "lovely" hair. If any adventurer has long hair, 
Coral incessantly offers to braid it. 

Gurgle Brine. Gurgle Brine is ancient and lost her voice 

to a bargain made long ago. She speaks through the 
decaying lips of rotted fish within 30 feet of her. She is 
quick to anger and tends to slap others with a trout when 
making overzealous points, even against her own sisters. 

10D. WATER GEYSERS
You can expand on this area through the following:

Geysers. In the gloom, it can be difficult to discern a 

geyser’s mouth. Roll initiative thrice, each one 
representing a cluster of geysers. On its turn, it subjects a 
character standing on it or within 5 feet of it to a DC 14 
Dexterity saving throw. If a character was standing on it, 
they are jettisoned 10 feet into the air and crash to the 
ground prone, taking 1d6 bludgeoning damage. A 
character standing within 5 feet of one that fails its saving 
throw must make a DC 10 Constitution saving throw if it 
was concentrating on a spell; its concentration is broken 
on a failure. 

Grimlocks. You can add 2d4 + 2 grimlocks to this cave. 

They fight only in self-defense and warn the adventurers 
in Undercommon that the “crones provide… but also 
take.” That is, to say, fish and safe harbor in return for 
sacrifices the grimlocks must make. The coven has tossed 
around the idea of ensorcelling the grimlocks to battle 
House Auvryndar, but know the savages are no match for
the drow. In the meantime, having simple servants to 
collect food and warn of intruders is enough. 

10G. LARDER
You hear a storm of whispering chains and wracking sobs 
drifting out from the darkness:

"Then," a rough voice grumbles in broken Common, 

"then I's gonna snap off yer fingers, grind 'em, eat 'em, 
feed 'em to you. You like that? Make you… into stew."

"Let me go," sobs a young boy. "Let me go!"

Delvin, the 13-year-old human boy, believes the goblin, 
Lerk, is his jailor. 


49

Freeing Delvin. The sea hags don't take kindly to the 

theft of their "cattle" but aren't about to take to arms to 
prevent it. If confronted, the hags merely shrug and say, 
"He was the river's bounty—ours to collect" as if that 
alone excuses everything. They know that there shall be 
more prey to come, long after the adventurers have gone. 

Returning Delvin. If the adventurers promise to return 

Delvin to Skullport, he provides information, carries their 
gear, and will act as a guide once in the town. He provides 
the following:
• Skullport is ruled by the Xanathar Guild under the 

paranoid watch of Sundeth, a half-ogre that delights in 
violence and shows of strength.

• An old archmage by the name of Tasselgryn Velldarn 

runs The Poisoned Quill and can teleport individuals 
out of Undermountain—for a price. 

• Pockets of resistance to the Xanathar Guild are holding 

out in Skullport, desperate for aid. 

10H. HAGS' HOARD
This hoard's a graveyard. A mountain of wrecked 
rowboats, twenty feet high, are needled by barnacle-
encrusted masts. Countless captain's wheels have been 
pounded into the walls, accompanied by skulls—some 
bleached white, some yet still rotting, but all ghastly, all 
stolen from the depths… hopefully. 

Jutting from the mountain of wreckage like some 

ominous tower is a crow's nest watched by a ship's wailing 
banshee figurehead.  
Additional Loot. Among the treasure already described, 
you can add a candle of the deep and a hat of wizardry to 
the hoard, described in Appendix A, as well as 1d4 + 1 
potions of healing and one potion of poison. 

VARIANT: THE BOY-WONDER
If you'd like to steer the adventurers into conflict with the 
coven and improve upon Delvin's importance, consider 
making him a nascent sorcerer (treat him as an apprentice 
wizard except with a 14 in Charisma and an 11 in 
Intelligence; whenever he casts a 1st-level or higher spell, 
you can roll on the Wild Magic table found in the Sorcerer 
class section of the PHB). 

The hags recognized his innate power and sought to 

groom him into their tool through some foul ritual learned 
from below the waves—and then ship him off to Halaster 
Blackcloak to be taught in Dweomercore (the Mad Mage's 
academy found on Level 9 of Undermountain). 

In this variant, the coven desperately attempts to stop 

the adventurers from taking Delvin, even resorting to 
violence. They will, however, retreat into the River 
Sargauth to lick their wounds and try again another day—
such as when the boy is back in Skullport, all alone. 

12. BOO-TY HUNTERS
The spirits clamor loudly to each other and exude 
shimmering lights that dance upon the stones and water. 
When the adventurers approach, they hear:
“Thar be nothin’ here, Slurtongue,” some ethereal voice 
echoes from afar. 

“Just ‘curz yer blind ass can’t see don’t be mean nothin’ 

worth somethin’ ain’t here,” answers a barbed voice. 

“I’ll get ye down, boy, say that again.”
“Ye can’t cut me down,” Slurtongue mocks. 
“I can try!” shouts the first voice. 
“Try then, you transparent cur!” 
You hear the rasp of ghostly steel and a shuddering sigh 

from a third mouth. 
The pirates are initially unhostile to the adventurers. If 
questioned, they explain that they were once sailors of 
The Lady's Slipper. They don't know how long it's been 
since they died in these caverns, only that they met their 
grisly ends at the hands of the "Ladies of the River" (the 
sea hag coven of A10). 

The spirits habitually complain about the afterlife and 

pine for the days when they could still taste the salt on the 
wind—often saying, "Yahar, aye, them were the days," 
which is echoed by the other two spirits. They know they 
can't stray more than a hundred feet from the River 
Sargauth. 

14. STONECARVERS' HALL

14C. HALL OF STONE
At the far end of the hall slumbers an abomination: a 
three-armed, three-legged creature whose very flesh is 
stone. A single, closed eye adorns its torso like a pendant, 
and where a neck would be is instead a fanged maw.
If you want to skip the rigamarole of an Arcana check to 
determine what the hell kind of creature this is, the Mad 
Mage himself can telepathically lecture them on this xorn
and its nature. Read the following:
A voice blooms from within your skull: the voice of the 
Mad Mage.

"It's called a xorn," the Mad Mage lectures. "A creature 

of Elemental Earth, gluttonous and insatiable. Glides 
through earth as if it were a fish—a fish that becomes
water. Pioneers used to ride these babies for miles. This 
one's all bloated on gems and coins. I call him… Stephen. 
After my uncle."


50

17. DANGEROUS PATHS

17A. CONTESTED CAVERNS
A hoarse voice thunders from the darkness as spears 
shriek and the gears of crossbows click:

"Halt! Come no further, strangers, lest you be met with 

ash and steel. Identify yourselves before the Legion of 
Azrok or die as the drow did: alone and afraid."

A platoon of armored men stands behind barricades and 

outcroppings, their weapons of war at the ready. Behind 
them, the cavern narrows into a steep decline that sinks 
towards the bowels of the earth. 
The voice belongs to Kliyuse the Skull Cleaver, a 
hobgoblin captain. His soldiers guard the junction of 
these caverns, as well as the entrance to Level 4 of 
Undermountain, a secret he keeps close to his chest. 

Once the adventurers identify themselves, read:

The captain barks, "There's nothing beyond here for you, 
strangers. The elves lie in wait in the tunnels yonder. Turn 
back, for my lord and commander, Warlord Azrok, has 
demanded that all visitors present themselves to his hall. 
You are to report to Azrok's Hold; you will be met with 
peace and lodgings. My men shall ensure your safe 
passage. Do not disappoint."

17E. OTYUGH
The cavern grows rank with decay. Corpses lie in 
abundance: elves, quaggoths, men, and goblinoids. You 
hear a whisper on the absent wind, a whisper sung from 
the corpse pile: "Save me… please." 
The otyugh that lairs here uses its Limited Telepathy 
feature to try and urge a character towards the garbage 
pile where it attacks from. The otyugh has advantage on 
Dexterity (Stealth) checks to remain hidden during this 
time. If the adventurers are being escorted by the 
hobgoblins, the otyugh doesn't try to lure creatures 
towards it, but will attack if they root through its garbage 
pile on their own accord. 

20. DROW TOWN
Few changes or additions are necessary for Area 20.

20B. T'RISSA'S QUARTERS
The priestess's bed is filled with spiderwebs, just like her 
black heart. A chest carved in the likeness of a spider with 
eyes of red crystal sits in an alcove, watched over by the 
stuffed heads of bugbears, goblins, and hobgoblins.
Additional Loot. The adventurers find a diamond worth 
300 gp and a pearl worth 100 gp along with the T'rissa's 
other treasures, allowing them one use of a revivify spell 
and the component needed for the identify spell, which 
they'll sorely need.

20D. DEMON MIRROR
When the adventurers examine the mirror, read:
An oval mirror dominates the hovel, its stone frame 
carved into eerily realistic spiders that seem to twitch and 
crawl with every glance. Spare no doubt: the ancient 
dwarves did not make this foul thing. 
If a creature in the likeness of T'rissa approaches the 
mirror, read the following: 
The mirror's reflection swirls, yawns, and darkens into 
smoke from behind which a spider clicks its mandibles 
and offers a greeting in Elvish. 
If a creature not in the likeness of T'rissa approaches the 
mirror, read the following:
The mirror's reflection twists and churns like the high-
tossed sea. Blackness thins to smoke as the sounds of rage 
echo out from the glassy surface. A creature made solely 
of foul, yellow wax glares at you with a single red eye and 
snarls something in a language better left unknown by the 
men of this world. 

21. AZROK’S HOLD
The dwarven ruins lie in filth. The narrow streets are 
strewn with trash while banners hang without wind, each 
bearing a bloody handprint inside a red triangle. 
Hobgoblin patrols make a music all their own as metal 
and leather pound against ancient stone. 
If the adventurers are unaccompanied by hobgoblins sent 
by Kliyuse the Skull Cleaver (see Area 17A), then two 
bugbears halt the party at the gates. Otherwise, they salute 
the platoon and have a short conversation in Goblin 
detailing the registration process for visitors. 

21. "KREK"
If pressed as to why a bugbear just left a baby on its shelf, 
and its forced to reveal its nature, the oni merely smiles 
and says, "A deal's a deal." Krek is unintimidated by the 
adventurers and is willing to bet that it'd receive 
institutional support from Azrok's forces if attacked.

Some other phrases that Krek can use are detailed 

below; adapt accordingly:
• "Don't make this any harder than it has to be for these 

people. Mind your business and mine, no?"

• "Would you rather I take up residence in Skullport? 

Waterdeep? Where so many children frolic about, lost 
in the ignorance of youth? Would you rather this 
nightmare be upon them?"

• "Leave me to my devices, knave, for every beast has to 

eat—and worse is the one that's desperate and starved."


51

21G. XANATHAR'S AMBASSADOR
You have the opportunity to intimidate your adventurers 
with a mind flayer and a game of dragonchess. When the 
adventurers arrive, Ulquess politely, but firmly, invites 
them to play a match with it. Read the following:
The aberration smiles, sweeping a hand towards a three-
tiered dragonchess set. "Do indulge me, wouldn't you? 
This thoroughfare—" The creature gestures to the air, 
towards all of Azrok's Hold. "—is so utterly unamusing. I 
relish a fresh challenge from a keen and curious mind."
The adventurer playing against Ulquess must contest its 
Intelligence check with (dragonchess) gaming set with the 
mind flayer's (which has a +7 bonus). Nothing is anted 
except pride and satisfaction. 

Misdirection. The mind flayer cannot tolerate new 

visitors to Skullport. If the party seems intent on going to 
the town, not only does Ulquess reveal an Undermountain 
secret (as described in DotMM), it also provides exact 
directions to Level 4. It phrases it in a manner similar to, 
"Why would you waste your time there when the next 
descent is so close?"

Confrontation. If the adventurers confront the mind 

flayer over its insidious plot to seize control of the Legion 
by replacing Azrok and Lurkana's minds with intellect 
devourers, read the following:
The aberration gives you another smile, this one far too 
smug for your liking. "Go on then. Tell the fool. Tell 
Azrok what you've learned. What can be a peaceful 
transition will instead be red. So very, very red. I'll start 
with the children. Turn them into a murderous horde. Let 
them soak up the arrows as I glide into that hall and rip 
the hobgoblin's brain from his skull. See that I won't."

21M. PREETA KREEPA
Arcane flames paint this cave in flickering lights as rats 
scurry in and out like a river. A woman standing before a 
stone hovel has her back to you. She plucks moss from 
the wall and handfeeds her rats. When she turns to you, 
you have to swallow your disgust—for where her eyes 
ought to be are two beholder stalks that blink milky tears.

"Only the desperate or blind come here," the old woman 

says, cuddling a rat. "Which, I wonder, are you?"
Preeta is cordial, but cautious. She's a veteran of these 
caverns, having fled from the wrath of her former master, 
the lich Arcturia, one of the Mad Mage's apprentices. 
Much has changed in those years, however, and her 
knowledge is dated. She can at least describe the next 
level, the Twisted Caverns, as "a watery realm of fishfolk
and moldering fungi."

Additional Loot. Carved by a spell of stone shape, 

Preeta's shelves are stocked with various alchemical 
ingredients and moldy tomes. Amongst them are 2d4 + 2 
potions of healing that Preeta has been brewing so as to 
better assist the hobgoblins. She can be persuaded (DC 
14) to part with up to three for the adventurers. 

Free Alussiarr. As described in DotMM, Preeta 

suggests the party free Alussiarr on Level 14. Read:
Preeta draws closer. Her eyestalks shed milky tears. 
"Listen," she whispers. "Down in the depths, on the 
fourteenth level of Undermountain lies Arcturiadoom—
the domain of my former master, a lich by the name of 
Arcturia. It was she who cursed me to this hideous form. 

"Amongst her many victims is the prisoner Alussiar, a 

man whose very blood is magic. She draws upon it like a 
well, using it for her foul magics. Free him, I implore you. 
If not for his sake, then for the sake of all Undermountain. 
All the world."
Arcturia. So afraid of her former master, Preeta avoids 
using Arcturia's name more than twice in one hour, lest 
the lich somehow hear it and fixate her arcane eye on 
Preeta. She will, however, share the following about the 
lich:
• "She" is an apprentice of the Mad Mage, and like him, 

took many apprentices of her own. Those that vexed or 
failed her were met with death or disfigurement—like 
Preeta.

• "She" is a creature of habit and spent much of her time 

in Halaster's domain on the lowest level of 
Undermountain, only returning to Arcturiadoom to 
terrorize her students. Preeta suspects this is true to even 
this day. 

• Unbeknownst to Halaster, "she" forged a weapon 

capable of cleansing all of the fourteenth level of 
Undermountain: a "weapon of mass disintegration" that 
gods only know how far-reaching it is now. To activate
the weapon requires six mithral keys which are inserted 
into the machine. 

• "She" has always envied and loathed two other 

apprentices of Halaster: Trobriand the Metal Mage and 
Muiral the Misshapen. Preeta knows little of them but 
has heard her master disparage them countless times. 

21N. AZROK'S HALL
What was once a dwarven smithy has been since 
renovated into the warlord's great hall. Ancient ash still 
stains the stone walls and rusted weapons and tools line 
the walls. A crimson basin once used to quench metal now 
clearly quenches a different thirst. Worgs gnaw on bones 
while goblinoids stand at attention, spears at the ready. 

"Welcome honored guests," says a hobgoblin woman 

dressed for war. She stands at the far end of the hall, a 
hand on the hilt of her longsword. A hobgoblin male sits 
atop a throne of bleached skulls, a foot resting on the 
ancient anvil that once sang in this hall. His hand rests on 
a greatsword's pommel and a helm covers much of his 
face, darkening his eyes.

"Stand and be recognized," the warlord grumbles. 

"Humble yourself in this hall and be exalted. Exalt 
yourselves and you shall be humbled."


52

Azrok is proud but desperate for aid. His people are 
slowly losing the war with the drow. He promises the 
adventurers riches, safe passage, and favor if they 
accompany a force into Area 20, Drow Town, or if they 
bring him the head of T'rissa, the leader of the elves here. 

If the adventurers refuse, Azrok is disappointed but 

offers no violence. His forces are too spread thin to deny 
the adventurers passage to Level 4, Skullport, or even out 
of his domain, lest more of his soldiers be cut down in the 
adventurers' escape. He does, however, expect tribute.

Lurkana's Quest. After the adventurers finish with 

Azrok, Lurkana asks for their aid, as described at the start 
of this level in DotMM.

22. BARRELSTALK GARDEN
As described in Chapter 4, a barrelstalk is a cask-shaped 
fungus that can be tapped and drained of the water inside 
it. A single barrelstalk contains 1d4 + 4 gallons of fresh 
water. Its husk provides 1d6 + 4 pounds of food.

23. WAY TO SKULLPORT
The cavern narrows into a single path down which, far off 
in the darkness, beyond the twists and turns, lies 
Skullport, that town of infamy, that town of legend.
Ripplebark is a shelf-like fungus resembles a mass of 
rotting flesh, but it's surprisingly edible. Though it can be 
eaten raw, it tastes better roasted. A single sheet of 
ripplebark yields 1d4 + 6 pounds of food.

SPECIAL EVENT
You can use the following event on Level 3:

CHIMERA DRIFT
If you're looking for a high-paced montage as the 
adventurers escape House Auvryndar, throw in this event 
as they traverse the River Sargauth, either on foot or by 
boat. A drow elite warrior flies atop T'rissa's chimera
and accosts the adventurers. Meanwhile, two rowboats 
with 4 drow apiece row down the river to catch up.

Chimera. The beast opens with its Fire Breath attack 

and takes the Disengage action while that attack 
recharges, or it uses its other attacks. If reduced to half hit 
points or lower, it retreats, regardless of what its rider 
desires. Never does it land in a single spot, nor does it ever 
stop moving.

Drow Elite Warrior. The drow rains hell down on the 

adventurers with its crossbow.

Drow. The drow pilot their rowboats down the river; 

one uses its action to maintain the boat while the others 
fire hand crossbows. They have manacles aboard to chain 
up any caught characters. 

EPILOGUE

Once the adventurers have cleared this level, they should 
ascend to 8th level. 

Choose one of the narrations below to end your session, 

adapting them to fit the events that transpired:

THE STANDARD SEND-OFF
Undermountain has shown you once again the stupid, 
stubborn crusade of life. No matter how dismal things 
may be, no matter how barren the land, life continues to 
eke out a pitiful existence despite all odds. The dwarves 
once called this place home, and over their graves war 
both goblins and drow. You cannot help but yearn for the 
light of the sun, for the wind on your skin, of a world as 
vast as the sky—but instead, you turn your hopes 
downward, knowing that there's more to come.

HALASTER'S GAME: THE HOST'S SEND OFF
Once again that voice blooms in your skull as tenaciously 
as flowers after a harsh winter:

"And so, our contestants have floundered through the 

ruins of Stromkuhldur, the grave of the Melairkyn 
dwarves—gods rest their screaming souls, for only the 
dead and divine know what horrors they found so deep 
below the earth. Three levels down, twenty to go. Shall 
our beloved fools prevail, or will this place be their tomb 
like so many others? Find out next time on Dungeon of 
the Mad Mage!"

WHAT'S NEXT?
The Mad Mage's voice springs from the stones:

"Ah… A fork in the road. Dare you diverge to the Port 

of Shadow or delve into the nightmare realm below?"
The adventurers can choose a brief respite in Skullport or 
descending to L4, the Twisted Caverns. Use the Mad 
Mage to spur the debate, using the narrations below: 

SKULLPORT
The Mad Mage's tone is pitched with grief:

"Ah, Skullport. Dearest Skullport! Jewel of the 

Netherese magi, the only shard of civilization of 
Undermountain. Alas, the beholder's iron regime has 
stolen this place as well and its people cry out for 
freedom! Will our contestants be the gears that drives the 
machine of revolution? Or will they simply pass on by 
like the other would-be heroes of history?"

THE TWISTED CAVERNS 
The Mad Mage sneers:

"Only a fool would venture forth. Only fools and 

madmen, for in the twisted caverns below Stromkuhldur, 
the dwarves did find something, oh yes. Something that 
should not be. Something that hungers, but not for blood. 
The elves know of this horror. So, will our contestants 
carry on? Or will they turn to Skullport, tails between their 
legs, and save such horrors for another day?"


53

SKULLPORT: THE PORT OF SHADOWS

Skullport is an entirely optional portion of the adventure. 
The Port of Shadows is, however, the closest thing to 
safety and civilization in Undermountain. A place where 
a traveler can resupply. A place where a traveler can 
expect to wake without a knife pressed against his throat.

Skullport has quite the storied past, but its grim present 

is one ruled by the ruthless Xanathar Guild. Citizens 
continue to eke out their meager lives despite the 
perpetual night and the Guild's brutal regime. It was once 
an enclave of the ancient Netherese magi and now a hive 
of scum and villainy. Skullport is a shadow of its former 
glory haunted by the Thirteen Skulls: wizards brought 
back from death to act as eternal rulers of this place. 
They've lost their minds and so too their grip on Skullport.

The Missing Narrative. You must be wondering what, 

exactly, are your adventurers meant to do in Skullport? 
The short answer's "nothing." DotMM, you see, lacks a 
narrative for Skullport. Only locals and locales are named 
and described; no quests are provided. There are, 
however, hints of quests—and in this supplement they've 
actually been expanded. 

A Criticism. It almost feels as if Skullport is an 

afterthought of DotMM. That the writers wrote it to be so 
desolate and of so little consequence just to appease a 
checklist that demanded Skullport finally be represented 
in a 5th Edition adventure. While this supplement is by no 
means perfect, it should go a long way in fleshing out the 
Port of Shadows. 

PREVIOUSLY ON DUNGEON OF THE MAD MAGE
There are a few considerations from levels above that you 
need to keep in mind when running this chapter:

Delvin. Captured by the sea hags of the River Sargauth, 

the young boy's disappearance has not gone unnoticed. 
Delvin's poor mother roamed Skullport for half a week 
before the boy's friend, Kal, told her the truth: that 
"monsters snatched him" as they "borrowed" a rowboat to 
explore the caves outside Skullport. If the adventurers 
rescued Delvin, he returns to his mother's loving arms. 
She, Selnathia, expresses her gratitude by providing the 
adventurers a warm meal and a place to stay. 

Pay a Harper Debt. As described in the Adventure 

Hooks section of DotMM's Overview, Threestrings asked 
the adventurers to deliver a pouch of gemstones to Ca'al, 
tavernkeeper of The Flagon and the Dragon (see A19). 

QUICK NOTES
•
Skullport seems to be intended as a rest top for the 
party and nothing more. This supplement is geared 
towards fleshing out the town; use it at your own 
discretion. 

•
The Xanathar Guild rules Skullport. They're at war 
with the Zhentarim due to the events of Waterdeep: 
Dragon Heist. In short, when negotiating a merger, 
one of Xanathar's precious items went missing. 
Paranoid, the beholder accused the Zhents of theft and 
promptly turned the emissaries to ash, sparking a full-
on street war. Zhentarim characters, as well as 
Harpers, might find themselves imprisoned or 
executed if their allegiances are made known.

•
Tasselgryn Velldarn can teleport characters to 
Waterdeep for 50 gp a head. It's a one-way trip that 
ends in the attic of an orphanage in the Dock Ward. 

•
Since clearing Level 3 should raise them to 8th-level, 
the adventurers can make use of their first of 
Halaster's Gates on Level 2, spiriting them to Level 4. 
Thus, if they leave via Tasselgryn Velldarn, they 
might never need to return to Skullport at all. 

•
There's no general store in Skullport and goods are 
sold at five times their normal price. Skullport's rich 
on gold but it's short on food and other necessities that 
only the surface offers.

•
Skullport was once a haven of thieves, pirates, magi, 
and wanted men. You can include personal quests for 
your adventurers here if their story involves any of 
these elements. 

RETURN OF THE THIRTEEN
You can run this quest for Skullport. It's designed to take 
the adventurers throughout the town's areas. 

In ancient days the thirteen flameskulls ruled Skullport. 

Theirs was a harsh but fair regime—but as the eons have 
slipped by, so has their lucidity. If the adventurers can 
somehow restore their minds, the flameskulls would no 
doubt seize Skullport from the Xanathar Guild—for while 
they're outnumbered, the Thirteen cannot die, and there's 
a distinct lack of holy water in the Port of Shadow. Over 
days or weeks, the Thirteen can turn Skull Island into a 
screaming oven.

To restore the Thirteen, the adventurers must walk back 

a single flameskull from its dementia. How? By bringing 
it to an underwater grotto that sports the final legacy of 
the Sargauth Enclave: the Netherese magi who founded 
Skullport. Danger abounds, however—not only do the 
adventurers need to transport the skull underwater 
without its flames extinguishing, they must also contend 
with various forces:


54

Xanathar Guild. The Guild grows wary if they see the 

adventurers communicating with the Thirteen. A 
lieutenant of Sundeth at first tries to scare off the 
adventurers. Failing that, the lieutenant informs Sundeth, 
who dispatches his forces to round up the adventurers and 
imprison them in the Tower of the Seven Woes. 

Sea Hags of Sargauth. Unless they were previously 

killed on the Sargauth Level, the coven catches word of 
the adventurers' plans by means of Anderian Dusk (see 
A30). The hags believe that the Mad Mage would destroy 
them if Skullport was restored under their watch. They 
ambush the adventurers in the Grotto of the Netherese.  

I. A REVOLUTION OF FLAMES
Return of the Thirteen begins with one of three quest 
givers. See each of their respective areas in Areas of Note
below for details on how to issue the quest.

Bosskyn Gorrb. This blind Zhentarim spy has found 

himself embroiled in the Xanathar Guild-Zhentarim street 
war described in Waterdeep: Dragon Heist. Without his 
sight, he stands no chance of escaping Skullport and, if 
his cover were blown, he would hang from the gallows. 
So, the tiefling hopes to topple the Guild by restoring the 
Thirteen. See Area 26 for more information. 

Felrax. A Harper mage tormented by the fantasy of 

turning Skullport into a shining city beneath the 
mountain, Felrax has researched the ritual necessary to 
restore the Thirteen's mind. See Area 31.

Ulvira Snowveins. A Harper spy, Ulvira has already 

failed before. The last adventurers she turned to for this 
quest now languish at the bottom of the River Sargauth. 
She has no idea how or why they were murdered but is 
wracked with guilt all the same. See Area 15 or 23 for 
more information.

Once the adventurers agree, they must lure a flameskull 

into captivity. Insane but passive, the flameskull doesn't 
put up a fight and merely tries to escape with the harmless 
perseverance of sand falling through one's fingers. Let 
your players come with whatever antics they may. Only if 
harmed does the flameskull attack; otherwise, it mumbles 
incoherently like a beloved and tragically demented 
grandfather. 

II. NIGHTSHADE'S SIMPLE REQUEST
The adventurers' quest giver sends them to Nightshade, 
the withered crone that runs the poison shop (see Area 
34). She has weathered countless years in Skullport and 
has forgotten more forbidden alchemy than most students 
will ever learn. She's aware of the ritual that can restore 
the Thirteen, as well as the most necessary component for 
it: Netherese blood mixed with arachnid venom. 

To acquire this blood, Nightshade sends the adventurers 

to the Tanor'thal Refuge (Area 36) to drain blood from a 
victim: Gonderth Nethran, the last descendant of the 
Netherese pioneers that founded Skullport. Nightshade 
guards the secret importance of the man's blood until the 
adventurers return, however. 

III. REACHING THE GROTTO
Armed with Nightshade's tincture, the adventurers must 
now transport a flameskull to the Grotto of the Netherese, 
which lies under water. For the sake of the adventure, 
assume that a flameskull submerged completely in 
running water is reduced to 0 hit points until its 
Rejuvenation feature kicks in above water 24 hours later. 
Thus, the adventurers must figure out how to transport the 
skull underwater without its flames extinguishing. 

There are multiple methods to this, such as:

• Trapping oxygen in a rowboat by flipping it, and then 

taking it underwater.

• Dousing a flameskull in a potion of water breathing or 

casting water breathing on it. 

• Wrapping a flameskull in a cloak of the manta ray, 

provided by the kuo-toa in Area 10.
Regardless of the method, the adventurers are sent to 

Area 10 by their quest giver as they suspect the kuo-toa 
knows the location to the grotto, and that its lair is the 
closest land to it. The kuo-toa will act as a guide in return 
for food, which it communicates through gestures, if no 
character can speak with it. See Area 10 for more 
information on the journey to the grotto. 

IV. LEGACY OF THE SARGAUTH
The cavern glitters with the beauty of a thousand stars. 
Mineral veins ripple through the walls like rivers of metal 
while gemstones adorn the ceiling. Sconces float in the 
empty air, emitting blue-and-white flames. 

Standing grand on a small island is a marble statue 

depicting three magi: two wielding staves while the third 
looks to the distant horizon, a hand on her brow. 
The grotto was found by the ancient Netherese. When the 
Sargauth Enclave sought to raise thirteen guardians for 
their home, they first brought the volunteers here to die 
and be reborn as flameskulls. Here, before the statue, they 
gave these newly risen guardians their one and only 
instruction: "Rise, ye spirit, as guardian and counsel. Now 
and forever."

Any flameskull brought here is awed. Its eyes never 

leave the statue as the flood of memories press against that 
gate of senility. If the tincture is poured on the skull's 
scalp and those ancient words are uttered in ancient 
Netherese (or by one under the spell of tongues), the 
flameskull's sanity is restored after 1 minute. 

The Coven. If they were not previously killed in Level 

3 of Undermountain, they enter the grotto and attack the 
adventurers. They fear Halaster will blame them for 
Skullport's restoration and don't tolerate the adventurers' 
antics. While all three are alive, they benefit from the 
Shared Spellcasting trait, as described in the "Hag 
Covens" sidebar in the "Hags" entry of the Monster 
Manual. They are joined by their three giant crabs and 
eight grimlocks they've pressed into service. When these 
forces arrive, read:


55

A foul song echoes off the stones, coming from the deeps. 
It rings far and long, sinuous and suspect. The waters 
lap… until the first creature emerges: a dog-faced crone 
draped in seaweed. Her horrific face splits into a yellow 
grin and in an abrasive voice she calls, "The Sargauth 
drowned eons ago and so shall their legacy. Prepare to 
join them."

As you prepare yourself for battle, the first of the hag's 

forces surface—gray, grotesque creatures with lidded 
eyes wielding cudgels and chortling in pain or madness. 
Two more crones rise from the depths, straddling giant 
crabs with bloodied pincers.
Tactics. The hags hang in the rear, making good use of 
their spellcasting and Death Glare actions. If reduced to 
half health, or if one hag dies, the coven flees into the 
depths to fight another day. Meanwhile, the grimlocks and 
giant crabs advance forward. The grimlocks' minds have 
been twisted and shattered by cruel magic that has 
sprouted gills along their necks—the coven's handiwork. 

V. RETURN TO SKULLPORT
Once restored, the flameskull cackles and hovers to the 
cavern's ceiling, taking a small tunnel that only can only 
fit a Tiny-sized creature. The light of its emerald flames 
soon disappear and its cackling fades.  

When the adventurers return to Skullport, they find the 

Xanathar Guild waiting to arrest them. The force consists 
of six duergar, four human thugs, two bugbears, and a 
human veteran. After a moment, Sundeth himself (a half-
ogre champion) arrives on his wyvern mount. 

Roll initiative. On an initiative count of 15, the restored 

flameskull drifts into view and unleashes a fireball spell, 
catching most Xanathar combatants except Sundeth and 
his wyvern. Read:
Emerald lights dance upon the carnage—and the air itself 
crackles as some foul thing cackles, "Ancient days have 
come again! We shall never die!"

The crackling grows louder as a horse-sized fireball 

consumes the battlefield, baking warriors into ash and 
turning their screams into a ghastly choir.
Flight or Flames. On his turn, Sundeth flees atop his 
wyvern, making a break for the Tower of the Seven Woes 
(Area 9). If the adventurers attempt to kill Sundeth, the 
flameskull shouts, "Leave him! He shall be mine. He shall 
be the last to die in that screaming oven. Watching his 
men burn, feeling the flames of his reckoning growing 
ever warmer." The undead thanks the adventurers and 
then leaves to rally its brethren from their desert of 
dementia. 

Rewards. For successfully completing this quest, any 

Harper or Zhentarim characters gain 2 renown with their 
respective faction. Additionally, one of these quest givers 
offers four potions of healing, a pouch containing 100 gp, 
eighteen days' worth of rations to be split however the 
party sees fit and guaranteed safe harbor for as long as 
these individuals remain in Skullport.

AFTERMATH
The flameskull works tirelessly to lead its brethren to 
sanity—a task that takes six days. Once all are sane, they 
lay siege to Skull Island, being reborn every day after each 
defeat until all the Guild's agents have been reduced to 
smoldering ash. Unless the adventurers help speed things 
along, this siege takes two weeks to win. Only the 
gargoyles perched upon Skull Island give the undead 
trouble—but even they are doomed to dust.

Once victorious, the Thirteen reestablish their harsh-

but-fair regime. They force the citizens of Skullport to 
work together in repairing the hoist that lifts seafaring 
vessels over the retaining wall. After two weeks of 
grueling work, the hoist is repaired and Skullport regains 
its trade route to the outside world. In time, hundreds 
flock to Skullport, many of them wanted or desperate 
men. This legendary hive of villainy shakes itself awake 
to sneer once again in the face of the world. 

As for Halaster Blackcloak, he grins to himself as the 

spectacle unfolds, ever eager for new and brave souls to 
wash up in Skullport just to be forced to compete in his 
game. 

APPROACHING SKULLPORT
To reach Skullport is to weather the creeping horrors of 
Undermountain. Two means of travel are possible:

By Foot. The twisting passages to the Port of Shadows 

are rife with danger. From Areas 17 or 23 on the Sargauth 
Level, it will take two days by foot to reach the town.

By Boat. By plying the River Sargauth, it will take six 

hours to reach the Port of Shadow. 

Random Encounters. Using a d20, roll for a random 

encounter every four hours of travel by foot. While 
traveling by boat, roll every two hours. On a roll of 18-
20, a random encounter occurs. Consult the appropriate 
table below:

CLOAKED IN RED
Cloakers are featured on Levels 5 and 6 and you can 
introduce one now to give your adventurers insight to 
future encounters later. 

As the party plies the River Sargauth, they hear a 

distant, unsettling moan from upstream. Out from the 
darkness swoop four cloakers (one true cloaker and three 
illusory duplicates created by its Phantasms action). On 
its first turn, it uses its Moan action while within 60 feet 
of the boat. On its second turn, it swoops down to engulf 
one victim with its Bite, defending itself on subsequent 
turns with its Tail attack until it's time to flee. 


56

RANDOM CAVERN ENCOUNTERS

d6 Encounter
1
Quaggoth Warband

2
Gone Fishing

3
Legion Platoon

4
Duergar Hunters

5
Death from Above and Aside

6
Cranium Rats!

Treasure. Cloaker carcasses are invaluable. Their hide 

makes for wind- and water-resistant leather and some 
consider its meat a delicacy—certainly a step up from the 
carrion being served in Skullport right now. The 
adventurers can sell the carcass in Area 20, the Dark 
Harvest Market, for 75 gp.  

CRANIUM RATS!
Undermountain is plagued by rats in all but the most 
barren of places but the passages to Skullport are haunted 
by swarms of cranium rats (described in Volo's Guide 
to Monsters) that spy on travelers for the mind flayer that 
preys upon the Port of Shadow. 

Adventurers can notice the curious and eerily intelligent 

rats following them with a passive Perception score of 14 
or higher. The rats enjoy toying with humanoids, using 
their telepathy to appear as disembodied voices. They flee 
if attacked. 

DEATH FROM ABOVE AND ASIDE
The adventurers enter the territory of 1d6 + 2 piercers and 
1 roper, all packed into a passage approximately 20 ft. 
wide, 30 ft. long, and 40 ft. tall. 

Establish a marching order. The monsters, which are

indistinguishable from stalactites while motionless, wait 
until the adventurers are completely in the cavern before 
attacking. The adventurers will be surprised. 

Roper. The roper is adhered to the ceiling, 40 feet up, 

and is situated at the center of the passage. A creature 
grappled by its tendrils (which have a range of 50 ft.) falls 
up to 35 feet when freed from the roper's tentacle, taking 
up to 3d6 bludgeoning damage. 

Piercers. The piercers are congregated so as to blanket 

the entire heart of the passage. As the ceiling is 40 ft. high, 
each Drop attack deals 4d6 piercing damage on a hit. If a 
creature is struck by the piercer but not killed, shoving it 
off requires a DC 14 Strength (Athletics) check, using an 
action. Afterwards, they slowly squirm towards the 
cavern walls to climb out of harm's way.

Treasure. If the roper is slain, it crashes to the ground. 

Creatures that spend a minute rooting through its gizzards 
can find 3d8 gp, 4d6 sp, 10d4 cp, as well as a silver 
dagger. 

RANDOM RIVER ENCOUNTERS

d4 Encounter
1
Scrawled Omen

2
Gone Fishing

3
Cloaked in Red

4
River Wolves

DUERGAR HUNTERS
The adventurers cross paths with a party of 2d4 + 2 
duergar out hunting cave fishers, giant spiders, and other 
beasts. The passage the adventurers come through are 
strewn with old bones and pebbles, the sound of which 
can be heard by the duergar 120 feet away. Fearing 
conflict, they become invisible. 

If discovered and the adventurers look particularly 

threatening (such as if they aren't wounded), make a 
collective DC 12 Wisdom saving throw for the duergar. 
On a failure, they're frightened and cow before the 
adventurers. They can provide instructions to quickly get 
to Skullport, reducing travel time by 2d4 hours. 

If the adventurers look weak, there's a 25% chance that 

the duergar leader, a greedy murderer by the name of 
Klarn, leads his brethren in an ambush. 

GONE FISHING
This encounter can occur on foot or by boat. Three cave 
fishers (see Volo's Guide to Monsters for lore) have 
strung up a cavern's mouth with adhesive filaments. They 
lurk upside down nearby, sixty feet from the surface or 
ground, and have advantage on any Dexterity (Stealth) 
checks to remain hidden. 

Establish a marching order. The first character becomes 

adhered to the filament; if the characters were marching 
two abreast or more (or were in the same location on a 
boat), then both become adhered and are grappled (escape 
DC 13). Roll initiative; on the cave fishers' first turn, they 
use their Filament action to reel in their prey. Ever 
competitive, the predators all attack the first creature to be 
reeled in. 

Since the cave fishers are upside down, a character that 

is freed falls 60 feet and takes 6d6 bludgeoning damage; 
or half that, if they fall into the river. 

LEGION PLATOON
The adventurers cross paths with a platoon of the Legion 
of Azrok, consisting of 2d6 + 2 goblins, two bugbears, 
5d4 + 3 hobgoblins, and a hobgoblin captain. They 
aren't hostile to the adventurers unless any of the 
characters are drow. They've returned from Skullport with 
supplies (borne by the goblins, which march in the heart 
of the platoon). A scout reports to the captain if it finds 
any danger ahead (as described below).


57

As the adventurers traverse the passages, they come 

under the watch of a hobgoblin scout. Unlike other 
hobgoblins, this one wears leather armor and has left 
behind its shield so as to remain undetected. It's 60 feet 
from the adventurers when it creeps away to alert its 
superior officers which are half a mile behind. It has a +5 
bonus to any Dexterity (Stealth) checks. If the adventurers 
accost it, the scout explains itself—unless there are drow 
present.

If the scout successfully slips away, it informs the 

hobgoblin captain of the party's presence. If the party 
displayed any hostility, the platoon hunkers down in a 
cavern for an hour, ready to fight. If the party was not 
hostile, they march on and inevitably cross paths with the 
adventurers. The captain requests the adventurers visit 
Azrok's Hold on Level 3 if they haven't already, so as to 
help fight "the vile drow."

QUAGGOTH WARBAND
A warband consisting of 2d4 + 3 quaggoths led by a 
quaggoth thonot regularly ambush travelers on their way 
to Skullport. Establish the marching order and determine 
if the adventurers are surprised. When the adventurers 
arrive in this chamber, the creatures are clinging to 
handholds above and leap down to attack. 

Thonot. The quaggoth thonot opens with a heat metal 

spell on an armored character. On its second turn, it casts 
mirror image. If its heat metal spell fails, it resorts to 
enlarge/reduce—either to engorge itself or to flee if 
things look dire. 

SCRAWLED OMEN
While plying the River Sargauth, the adventurers float 
through a passage painted with blood and dried bile. 
Creatures with darkvision can't make it out without a light 
source. Written on the wall is, in Undercommon, "drink 
not the lake." 

Floating on the surface is a dead kuo-toa trapped by 

stalagmites. Its ragged clothes are stained with mucus and 
bile. The kuo-toa fled from the horrors of the Twisted 
Caverns (see Level 4) but succumbed to the poison 
swimming in its guts, poison caused by the aboleth 
Illuun's presence. Much like the rest of its kin, the kuo-toa 
drank from the lake before realizing what sort of sickness 
raged within it. 

RIVER WOLVES
While the adventurers ply the River Sargauth, they 
encounter rough waters and rock outcroppings. The 
character piloting the boat must make a DC 16 
Intelligence (vehicles (water)) check to right the boat 
before it slams against the outcroppings. On a failure, a 
gaping hole is torn into the hull. Additionally, two 
characters that are on the edge of the boat must each make 
a DC 14 Dexterity saving throw or fall overboard. 

Every round, water pours into the boat; it slows and 

begins to sink. Characters with pails or similar containers 
can use an action to bucket water out. If three rounds go 
by without water being bailed out, the boat sinks. If the 
adventurers have wood or tar, they can attempt to seal off 
the hole, making a DC 12 Intelligence check with 
carpenter's tools. 

Just to add to the adventurers' misfortune, 1d6 + 2 

freshwater hunter sharks
come investigate the 

disturbance, attacking characters on the side of the boat or 
in the water. 

AREAS OF NOTE

The following areas are of note:

Entering Skullport. You have two immediate points to 

make about Skullport, regardless of how the adventurers 
get there: the iron regime of the Xanathar Guild and the 
harmless presence of the ancient flameskulls. 

As the adventurers approach Skullport, they catch a 

glimmer of flickering emerald light—a roaming, senile 
flameskull. If they watch, the flameskull drifts past 
Xanathar agents that guard the pass or docks; the guards 
even cringe at the flameskull, which pays them no heed. 
In this manner, you establish that the flameskulls are 
normal and passive. When the adventurers arrive, read:
An armed contingent greets you with unsheathed steel. A 
sergeant shouts, "Halt! The Eye sees all, and all who enter 
Skullport must identify themselves to the Xanathar Guild! 
Stand and be recognized or taste steel!"

As the men approach you, emerald light consumes the 

area, glimmering on the stones and distant water. Unease 
muddies the men's faces. They tense, they hesitate… And 
out floats a skull wreathed in emerald fire, whistling a 
jagged tune. It pays you no heed. It pays nothing any heed 
and merely wanders on, shedding light in the darkness. 

9. TOWER OF THE SEVEN WOES
Once this wretched tower teemed with prisoners, but now 
only a few languish in these cells, for Sundeth prefers an 
executioner to feeding extra mouths. Those imprisoned 
here have either vexed the half-ogre or are kept alive by 
orders of his superiors. Some even predate his command 
and he saw no reason to free them. The two notable 
prisoners are:

Dalanoth. This high elf marine's merchant vessel lays 

at the bottom of the River Sargauth, his crewmates 
butchered long ago by a gang that would later be known 
as the Mandible. Dalanoth has languished in his cell for 
well over a century. The Tower of the Seven Woes has 
changed many hands since then and no occupant ever saw 
fit to release the elf. Sundeth is curious as to how solitary 
confinement will take its toll on such a long-lived being, 
even if the half-ogre knows it will move on from Skullport 
long before the experiment is finished.


58

Jesheen. An accused Zhentarim spy, Jesheen has been 

tortured relentlessly for weeks. With the lack of other 
enemies, Sundeth is certain Jesheen is the spy he's long 
awaited, one that will lead him to "all the others." To no 
fault of her own, the woman has been driven into giving 
false confessions, leading to the arrests of several other 
citizens. 

10. KUO-TOA LAIR
The kuo-toa that haunts this place has seen better days. 
While it wonders why none of its relatives from the 
Twisted Caverns (see Level 4) have visited, it is otherwise 
unaware of the desperate war being fought between the 
kuo-toa and the aboleth Illuun.

RETURN OF THE THIRTEEN
Once the adventurers are ready to dive to the Grotto of the 
Netherese, they must first find the way. Their quest giver 
advises them to treat with the old kuo-toa that haunts the 
grotto outside Skull Island.

The kuo-toa is visibly nervous in the presence of a 

flameskull but holds steady. It's hungry and will act as a 
guide in return for food. If no character can speak 
Undercommon, the kuo-toa communicates this through 
gestures: it rubs its belly while frowning; pantomimes 
swimming; and flashes the adventurers a thumbs up.

Once its demands have been met, the kuo-toa dives into 

the water and returns with a cloak of the manta ray. It then 
beckons the adventurers to follow it below the River 
Sargauth. The journey is dark and unlit, and the grotto is 
easily lost between the gloom and stalagmites. The dive 
takes three minutes if the adventurers follow the kuo-toa. 

Suffocating. A character can hold its breath for a 

number of minutes equal to 1 + its Constitution modifier 
(a minimum of 30 seconds), after which it runs out of 
breath and survives for a number of rounds equal to its 
Constitution modifier (a minimum of 1 round). At the 
start of its next turn, it drops to 0 hit points and is dying. 

Once the adventurers arrive to the grotto, see "IV. 

Legacy of the Sargauth" above for more the next part of 
the quest. 

12. DEAD MAN'S CORNER
Amongst the corpses animated by Olive may be a few 
individuals the adventurers are acquainted with, such as 
old adventuring rivals or humanoids slain in the levels 
above—such as the Undertaker bandits from Level 1 or 
goblins from Levels 2 or 3. 

15. THE BLACK TANKARD
When the adventurers approach The Black Tankard, read 
the following:
A drunk erupts from the tavern doors, tossed out onto the 
cobbles by a minotaur dressed in torn leather. The beast 
shouts a word in a ghastly language, but its meaning is 
universal: "…and stay the hell out!"

The drunk meekly raises a fist and shouts a tangled 

word of protest before vomiting on the street. 
The drunk is actually Ulvira Snowveins, a Harper spy that 
has turned to drowning her guilt in ale. Several 
adventurers she turned to for aid three weeks ago wound 
up dead; she can't help but wonder if it was because she 
set them on a quest to restore the Thirteen (see Return of 
the Thirteen above). 

Ulvira mumbles incoherently about graves under the 

River Sargauth before
going catatonically silent. 

Afterwards, she drifts off into troubled sleep. The 
characters can take her home (learning the location by 
carousing with other patrons) or check her into a room at 
The Guts & Garters.

RETURN OF THE THIRTEEN
If the adventurers were introduced to Ulvira in this 
manner, and are still in town when she sobers up, she 
approaches them the next day and asks them for aid. See 
Area 23 for more information. 

16. GYUDD'S DISTILLERY
Gyudd is a crestfallen shield dwarf. A lover of his craft 
disappointed by inferior ingredients, Gyudd wants only to 
live up to his ancestors' brewing legacy. He offers 
payment if the characters can bring him any of the 
following:

Cave Fisher Blood. The blood of cave fishers (see 

Volo's Guide to Monsters) is alcoholic and used in several 
dwarven spirits. Gyudd pays 5 gp per vial of blood. A 
single fisher can provide up to five vials of blood. Cave 
fishers can be found in the caverns outside Skullport. 

Wheat, Barley, or Rye. For every pound of grain the 

adventurers bring Gyudd, he pays 3 cp (thrice its going 
price on the surface). 

19. THE FLAGON AND THE DRAGON
Ca'al Claddani runs the best tavern in Skullport and can 
provide information to the adventurers. 

Pay a Harper Debt. The characters may have the quest 

from Threestrings at the Yawning Portal in Waterdeep to 
deliver a payment to Ca'al. If they do so, the half-drow 
shows her appreciation by treating the party to a round of 
Goat's Head Ale. Word finds its way to Bosskyn Gorrb 
(the Zhent spy), Ulvira Snowveins and Felrax that 
Harpers are in town—or Ca'al sends them that way. 


59

RUMORS, GOSSIP, AND HEARSAY
In addition to possibly revealing an Undermountain 
secret, Ca'al can also share the following:
• "We had a pair of tiefling sisters here for a long while. Magi, 

they were. Pirates too, once. Heard they left for the Mad 
Mage's academy, buried far below the earth. Dweomercore, 
they call it." See Level 9 for more information.

• "The strangest thing happened the other day. These… slim, 

olive-skinned fellows stormed through Skullport. Seems like 
they were looking for something. Or someone." (Ca'al is 
referring to githyanki knights searching for mind flayers, 
namely the one that haunts Skullport; she doesn't know what 
a githyanki is.) See Level 16 for more information. 

• "Been gettin' plenty of Shar-worshippers in these parts. Say 

they're on a pilgrimage to 'Vanrakdoom,' whatever the hell 
that is." See Level 18 for more information. 

• "Folks are so bloody scared of this 'Mad Mage' but I've seen 

my fair share of rowdy, old men in my day. Fella walks in 
here, I'll put a smile on his face." Ca'al then motions to a 
single bottle of malt liquor on the high shelf saved for 
important occasions. 

• "The Xans' run these parts ever since the Thirteen Skulls lost 

their god-hatin' minds. Plenty of folks are pining for the good 
old days when those undead ruled Skullport. 'Harsh, but fair,' 
they said the regime was."

• "Without the hoist, Skullport's as good as dead. Vessels of 

repute can't reach harbor. Economy's in shambles. Folks are
in shambles. Shame people can't put aside their suspicions 
long enough to repair it—but that's the way the Guild likes it. 
They want us divided and isolated from the outside world."

• "An outcast drow from House Freth washed up here. 

Apparently, there's a war between Houses Auvryndar and 
Freth—survived some great battle, he did and made it here 
without a copper to his name. Still made sure to spit on me 
for being 'only' half a drow." See Levels 10 through 12 for 
more information on these drow houses.

21. THE SWORD AND SEXTANT
The strongheart halflings that dwell here, Oleander and 
Will, are 
eager to 
procure 
accurate 
maps of 

Undermountain. Unfortunately, few individuals make 
their way to Skullport that can provide accurate 
descriptions of the Mad Mage's domain. 

If the adventurers visit, the halflings' current maps 

disappoint. They do, however, offer payment to 
characters that will sit and help sketch the chambers above 
by memory. For every hour the character remains there, 
they must succeed on a DC 18 Wisdom (Insight) check to 
recall the dimensions and features of the areas they 
traversed. On a failure, a character cannot recall the layout 
and the halflings lose confidence in the character. They 
pay 5 gp for every hour spent thus far. 

If the same character succeeds four times on this check, 

the halflings produce a mostly-accurate map of a 
particular level. As a thank you, the halflings gift one 
copy to the adventurer for free.

This process can be repeated for every level of 

Undermountain—but there's no guarantee that Halaster 
won't do any more "reorganizing" as he did after the 
Spellplague. 

22. THE GUTS & GARTERS
Business has been bad for such a long time for the inn that 
Quietude is surprised to find guests at his counter. He only 
keeps the inn afloat by spying for Xanathar. When the 
adventurers arrive, there are no other guests, the last one 
having checked out two days ago. 

A WORD OF ADVICE
Unless your players also played Waterdeep: Dragon 
Heist, it's suggested you omit the secret door that leads to
Xanathar's dungeon since it has no bearing on this 
adventure and your players are likely to mistake it for 
something significant. Suddenly you're digging through a 
second campaign book for a dungeon you have no earthly 
business running.

Assuming you don't omit it, depict the tunnel as the 

source of the Guild's reinforcements. The trek takes the 
better part of two days to reach Xanathar's lair. When the 
door's discovered, the characters present can hear voices 
muffled by the march of boots.

The adventurers can collapse the tunnel to seal off the 

Guild's reinforcements by means of an explosion, such as 
a shatter spell cast as a 4th-level spell. 

A MIND FLAYER AMOK
As described in DotMM, a mind flayer is rumored to be at 
large in Skullport, ever since it ripped out Tor Grayfell's 
brain (see Area 18). It's begun haunting The Guts & 
Garters, waiting for new and unsuspecting prey to come 
into its web. The mind flayer is unaffiliated with the 
illithid colony on L17 but knows of its presence.

While the adventurers are asleep, the mind flayer

psionically manipulates the lock on the window and 
enters the room. A character wakes when the mind flayer 
makes a Tentacles attack (with advantage) against it. 
Once the victim's awake, the mind flayer telepathically 
communicates, "Poor little lamb… Walked straight into 
the abattoir. My abattoir."

If reduced to half its hit points, the mind flayer uses its 

Mind Blast attack and flees from the window. 

If the adventurers report this attack to the Xanathar 

Guild, Sundeth instead tries to find and treat with the mind 
flayer to induct it into the Guild as an ambassador. There's 
a 10% chance that, the next night, the illithid instead just 
rips Sundeth's skull apart and snaps up the half-ogre's 
disappointingly small brain. Skullport then falls into 
anarchy. 


60

23. THE FEATHERED RAT
The most frequent patrons of The Feathered Rats aren't 
pet enthusiasts but the desperate and hungry—a 
disappointing truth Ulvira has had to live with. 

RETURN OF THE THIRTEEN
Already once before Ulvira, a Harper spy, has turned to 
adventurers to help thwart the Xanathar Guild and those 
poor souls now rest below the River Sargauth. She can't 
quiet the whispers that wonder if their demise was related 
to her quest to restore the Thirteen—and if their blood is 
on her hands. She's hesitant but desperate now. 

Unbeknownst to Ulvira, the sea hag coven of the 

Sargauth Level discovered her plot and made quick work 
of the adventurers she hired for the job. They remain 
vigilant to any future attempts to find the Grotto of the 
Netherese. 

Dreams of a better and freer tomorrow get the better of 

Ulvira and once again she turns to outsiders for aid—
whether they're Harpers or not. She sends them to Felrax 
at Dalagor's Fortress (see Area 31) once she can trust them 
with this mission. 

25. THE BAT'S ROOST
This fighting den boasts several combatants, none of 
whom are named in DotMM. Use the statistics of 
gladiators with varying races and weaponry.

All fights are one-on-one and last until first yield but 

killing isn't illegal. The Xanathar Guild has turned a blind 
eye to The Bat's Roost so long as they get a cut of the 
gambling profits. Magic is legal, but poison and potions 
are not. Any outside interference immediately ends the 
fight, cancels all bets, and guarantees a lifetime ban from 
The Bat's Roost. 

Sheathe. One notable fighter is a haggard man in 

scarred plate armor. Once an Oath of Devotion paladin of 
an adventuring party, this man was forced to commit 
atrocities just to survive—for he's just another victim of 
Halaster's Game. Having broken his sacred oath, the 
blackguard abandoned his old name for a new one: 
"Sheathe," for his only task left on this earth is to die to 
the blade of a worthy challenger. He warns any 
challengers that he will give no quarter and expects none 
himself. Blackguards are CR 8 characters described in 
Volo's Guide to Monsters. See Appendix B for its 
statistics.

26. THE KEEL HALL
Long-shuttered, The Keel Hall was once a festhall 
frequented by Skullport's many sailors. Now Bosskyn 
Gorrb, a blind spy, whittles away his days, awaiting 
orders from the Zhentarim. There are plenty of beds for 
visiting agents to rest in. 

RETURN OF THE THIRTEEN
Bosskyn, a veteran of Skullport, hungers to topple the 
Xanathar Guild and turn the Port of Shadows into a base 
of operations for the Zhentarim. However, due to the 
events of Waterdeep: Dragon Heist, the Xanathar Guild 
and the Zhentarim remain at war. Were his cover blown, 
Bosskyn would be facing either a quick bath in the River 
Sargauth or a lifetime in the Tower of the Seven Woes. 
Thus, this quest of his is also one self-perseverance. 

Only if the adventurers are proven members of the 

Zhentarim does he trust them enough to enlist them in his 
quest to restore the Thirteen to sanity. Unlike the Harpers 
who might turn to the adventurers, Bosskyn has no 
libertarian ideals. He doesn't dream of a day when 
Skullport is just or right. His plans stop only at handing 
the Thirteen the reins, for that's all he and the Zhentarim 
need. The undead will handle everything from there.

27. THE POISONED QUILL
Tasselgryn "Tas" Velldarn is an ancient crone with the 
following traits:

Ideal. "Life's a ride you can be kicked off of at any time, 

so spend your golden years however the hell you want."

Bond. "I can't leave Undermountain—who else would 

keep Halaster company?"

Flaw. "Madness is precipitated by genius."

ADDITIONAL SERVICES
In addition to teleporting the adventurers to Waterdeep, 
Tas can provide any of the following magical services:

Identify. For 10 gp, Tas will cast identify on a magical

item the adventurers provide. She's inscribed glyph of 
warding containing a spell of remove curse upon a stone 
tablet she keeps at her side whenever she performs this 
service. If the item is cursed, she charges an additional 
100 gp to the adventurers—a clause she negotiates before 
ever touching the object.

Mind Blank. For 150 gp, Tas casts mind blank on a 

character so as to "protect them from the Mad Mage's 
prying eyes."

Sending. For 5 gp, Tas can cast sending to contact a 

business acquaintance of hers in Waterdeep that will draft 
a letter addressed to whichever character the adventurers 
name, provided they have the right contact details.
Alternatively, for 25 gp, Tas provides a spell scroll of 
sending the adventurers can use. She always has 2d4 + 2 
scrolls available, as it's her most popular product. 

Unbeknownst to customers, Tas casts detect thoughts

whenever she goes into the back to retrieve one of the 
scrolls so as to glean insight into the character's message. 
Tas often provides this information to Halaster when he 
visits. 


61

31. DALAGOR'S FORTRESS
The adventurers can learn of Dalagor and his evil exploits 
by speaking to the Skullport citizenry, namely Ca'al at The 
Flagon and the Dragon. Alternatively, they can recall 
rumors and legends of the warrior with a successful DC 
18 Intelligence (History) check. 

If the adventurers break into the stone mansion while 

Felrax is present, the dragonborn mage casts greater 
invisibility on himself and silently gauges the intruders. If 
he concludes that they pose no threat or can be trusted, he 
speaks to them until it's opportune to dismiss the spell. 

RETURN OF THE THIRTEEN
"I've not a dream," the mage tells you. "Nothing of the 
sort. Only a fantasy. As a Harper, I'm sworn to fight 
tyranny no matter where, no matter how dire the fight. 
Even here in Skullport. So now I turn to you, my new 
friends, in my hour of need. Will you join me in sedition?"
Felrax aims to turn Skullport into a shining city under the 
mountain—but first he has to settle with restoring the 
Thirteen and let them do the heavy lifting of toppling the 
Xanathar Guild. After which, Felrax intends to spirit other 
Harpers and citizens of good repute to Skullport and 
gradually change this place into a just, egalitarian society. 
He knows it’s a long-shot but can't help but pine for it.

As a mage, Felrax knew where to look for secrets on 

how to mend the flameskulls' sanity and has spent years 
researching it. Alas, he's short of one ingredient to 
complete the ritual: a tincture that can only be brewed to 
perfection by the most skilled of alchemists. To that end, 
he must turn to Nightshade, the crone that runs a shop of 
poisons, Nightshade's Caress (see Area 34).

The Ritual. The ritual Felrax describes to the 

adventurers involves taking a flameskull to the last shard 
of the Sargauth Enclave, a place that, to these undead, 
would be akin to an altar. Once there, the flameskull must 
"behold the legacy of the Netherese" and hear the words 
that bore it into undeath millennia ago: "Rise, ye spirit, as 
guardian and counsel. Now and forever" in the ancient 
Netherese tongue. Felrax admits that it sounds cheesy but 
insists it'll work. Once the adventurers are ready, he gives 
them a stoppered tube containing a spell scroll of tongues
so as to "speak" in the ancient Netherese tongue. 

Legacy of the Sargauth. Felrax describes this altar as 

hidden in some underwater grotto in the waters of 
Skullport. The only denizen he's aware of that may know 
its whereabouts is the old kuo-toa that lives in sight of the 
Tower of the Seven Woes (Area 10). He insists the 
adventurers turn to the fishman for help.

33. THE OVERFLOWING URN
The Overflowing Urn is ran by a doppelganger with little 
to no impact on the adventure or the adventurers. Garryth 
is long dead, and the Xanathar Guild is unlikely to care 
about his murder. So, how do you show this to your 
players? There are a number of ways; choose the best that 
works for you:

The Widow. Garryth's wife, Allie, which we've 

invented for this quest, recently began to suspect that her 
husband has fallen to dementia. How else could he have 
forgotten such important details of their lives together, 
like their wedding or the death of their son Jeremiah? 
Allie can be heard lamenting in The Flagon and the 
Dragon; or Cal'al gossips with the adventurers about her 
situation. 

The Old Friend Seen. The doppelganger is engaged in 

some illicit activity outlawed by the Xanathar Guild. To 
cover its tracks, it uses the forms of other individuals 
while traveling. As the adventurers are passing through 
the streets, one spots an old friend that has no earthly 
business in Undermountain. As the party gives chase, the 
doppelganger shifts again around the corner. This process 
repeats every day the adventurers are in town until they 
finally catch the doppelganger in that form. How it knew 
the adventurer's acquaintance is up to you, be it as the 
character's murder or co-conspirator. 

Framed! Acting on a grudge, the doppelganger took the 

form of Ulvira Snowveins and dared to suggest that the 
Xanathar Guild should be toppled while in public. Ulvira 
is routinely arrested and sentenced to be hanged at the 
gallows the next day—even though her alibi is ironclad, 
and the adventurers know it themselves. 

DEATH OF THE DECEIVER
When the doppelganger dies or escapes it shifts 
randomly into several people, one of whom is someone 
that an adventurer knew from Waterdeep above until it 
finally settles into its natural, alien-like form. The 
doppelganger's presence incites a rash of suspicion and 
paranoia amongst the citizenry and even the Xanathar
Guild as no one knows who can be trusted.

34. NIGHTSHADE'S CARESS
The crone that runs this wretched shop is as ancient as she 
is unpredictable. Her only true motive is that the winds of 
change are always blowing and that it's her pleasure to 
influence them. To that end, she brews poisons to 
otherwise cheat lives of their full potential. Nightshade 
has no particular love or dislike for the Xanathar Guild, 
but if approached for aid, she delights at the opportunity. 

Additional Wares. Nightshade is not in the business to 

relieve ailments but cause them. On her shelves are a 
number of harmful concoctions described in the table 
below. Details and effects are provided in Appendix A. 


62

NIGHTSHADE'S WARES
Item
Stock
Price

Assassin's Blood poison
1
150 gp

Carrion Crawler Mucus poison
3
200 gp

Drow Poison 
2
200 gp

Potion of Poison
4
150 gp

Purple Worm Poison
1
2000 gp

RETURN OF THE THIRTEEN
Nightshade is instrumental in restoring the Thirteen's 
sanity. When the adventurers come to her for knowledge, 
read the following:
The withered crone gives you a yellow smile. "Ah… You 
seek to restore the Thirteen's rule—but how can they ever 
be whole again if their purpose lies forgotten? There are… 
means, of course. Means that are less savory than what 
the world above would prefer. But I've my ways. I've 
always had my ways and they are charted in blood. 

"You've no doubt seen the spider carved from stone that 

towers over Skullport. It was carved by the drow of House 
Tanor'thal and now teems with arachnids. For this ritual I 
require the blood of a victim not yet dead, cloudy with 
spider venom. Go forth and go fast, for those beasts have 
little patience."
Nightshade sends the adventurers to the Tanor'thal 
Refuge (Area 36). Once the adventurers return with the 
blood of Gonderth Nethran, the last living victim and last 
descendant of the Netherese line, Nightshade reveals the 
importance of the man's blood. 

If Gonderth died, she smiles at the news, delighting at 

the eradication of the bloodline. If he lives, she insists that 
he be left in her care "until the poison has been bled from 
his veins." 

After Nightshade has the blood, she prepares the 

tincture for the ritual over the course of four hours. 
Afterwards, read the following:
The crone hands you a stoppered tincture. Her rotted 
breath assails you like the winds of a thunderstorm as she 
says, "To restore the Thirteen, you must remind the 
flameskull's of their purpose, of their creators—but the 
Netherese magi are all dead, their kin reduced to bone and 
dust. All but one. And his blood is now yours to use."
See "III. Reaching the Grotto" above for the next part of 
the Return of the Thirteen quest. 

36. TANOR'THAL REFUGE
This abandoned stronghold teems with 3d8 + 4 giant 
spiders
spread out across three chambers. Three 

ettercaps watch over the arachnids like shepherds. 
Occasionally, these monstrosities creep down to 
Skullport, snatching up unsuspecting individuals and 
hauling them back to the Refuge as food. The arachnids 
will assault any intruders, but while the ettercaps fight to 
the death, the giant spiders retreat to guard their eggs if 
reduced to half their hit points. 

A creature that succeeds on a DC 16 Intelligence 

(History) check can recall that House Tanor'thal once 
dominated Skullport's slave trade. Drow characters 
succeed on this check automatically. 

Head. A small chamber reserved for the highest ranked 

member of House Tanor'thal and her consort, this room 
twitches with cocooned victims, many of which are feeble 
from venom and lost blood. 

Thorax. The thorax has several small living rooms 

carved into the stone, each sporting cold stone slabs upon 
which rotten straw mattresses have moldered. 

Abdomen. The entrance to the refuge, the abdomen is 

the largest chamber. It's ovoid in shape, 50 feet in length 
and 30 feet wide at its widest point. Once an audience 
chamber, it's now choked by webs and spider eggs.

Treasure. The drow were sure to clear everything out 

before they fled Skullport, but a few trinkets were left 
behind. In each room, underneath cobwebs, 1d4 silvered 
emblems bearing House Tanor'thal's spidery symbol (25 
gp) can be found. 

RETURN OF THE THIRTEEN
Nightshade (see Area 34) sends the party here to gather 
the necessary ingredient for the ritual tincture.

The party must drain the blood of a humanoid riddled 

with ettercap venom, someone on the verge of death, 
someone whose heart yet pumps. Cocooned victims can 
be found in the head of the Refuge. When the adventurers 
arrive, the only living victim is a human by the name of 
Gonderth Nethran. It so happens that Gonderth is the last 
of his line—a long line that stretches back to Skullport's 
heyday when the Netherese magi ruled the Sargauth 
Enclave. 

Gonderth, a commoner that can cast the light cantrip 

(Charisma is his spellcasting ability), is stable at 0 hit 
points. He's poisoned for the next 8 hours unless a spell of 
lesser restoration or the like is cast upon him. He's been 
without food or water for three days now. Even while 
unconscious, his latent magic manifests: his body glows 
as if under a light spell. 

SPECIAL EVENTS
You can run these events while in Skullport:

XANATHAR SENDS ITS LOVE
The Xanathar Guild finds a spy in its midst and promptly 
arrests the accused individual, which may be Bosskyn 
Gorrb, the Zhentarim spy, or Ulvira Snowveins, the 
Harper spy. If it's the latter, the doppelganger in Area 33 
set her up by taking her form and dared to publicly 
challenge the Guild's right to rule.

A force of four duergar led by a human veteran come 

to arrest the individual and spirits them to the Tower of 
the Seven Woes if unchallenged. The prisoner is paraded 
through the streets before the eyes of all. 


63

If the adventurers intervene, Sundeth sends more and 

more forces to solve the situation. The half-ogre can't 
afford appearing to have lost its grasp on Skullport lest it 
incur Xanathar's wrath. 

THE MAD MAGE PAYS A VISIT
You can surprise your adventurers with this event and 
bring them face to face with the Mad Mage in the most 
anticlimactic way possible. 

As described in DotMM, Tasselgryn "Tas" Velldarn and 

the Mad Mage are old friends. About once a month, 
Halaster visits. When together, the two act like an old 
married couple. Use this event after the adventurers have 
already met Tas but before they leave town—or if they 
ever return. The adventurers are walking through the 
gloomy streets when they catch sight of Tas with a 
stranger. Read the following:
As you make your way through these squalid streets, a 
blue light dances in the yet-intact windows of nearby 
stores. You hear a woman unleash a throaty laugh—
Tasselgryn Velldarn. As you round the corner, you see the 
mage clasping hands with an old loon whose staff is 
orbited by an azure wisp of light. An old man whose 
tangled beard is no match for the madness of his eyes. 
Eyes that lock onto yours.

"Well," echoes the familiar voice of the Mad Mage, "it 

seems you've caught me on a brief whimsy."
Halaster is enjoying his monthly visit with Tas and she 
hardly tolerates his antics. So, unless something dire 
occurs, the Mad Mage holds back on any pranks or 
violence; he won't, however, tolerate anything that upsets 
or threatens Tas.

While roleplaying the Mad Mage in this moment, dial 

back on the crazy. He doesn't threaten the adventurers at 
all, but instead congratulates them for making it this far
and wishes them luck. If asked for assistance or 
information, he remarks that that would be "cheating."

The true point of this event is to demonstrate that, 

somewhere, somehow, Halaster is still human despite 
having lived for millennia, despite being lost in the throes 
of madness. That there could be a rhyme to his reason. 
That he still has attachments. 

Halaster's Remarks. While he's here, the Mad Mage 

can mention any of the following:
• As he gestures to the town, the Mad Mage remarks, "Ah, 

Skullport. Dearest home of the desperate and lost. Yet 
without the Thirteen, Skullport's but a shadow of its former 
glory. The people do not cry out for revolution, but whimper 
for it into their cups and pillows."

• "This place has really gone to hell since the Hoist broke. See, 

folks are like a stew; if you don't stir it enough, it spoils. And 
this place sure is spoiled."

• "I wonder if that mind flayer is still running amok."

• "Skullport's wonderful for blowing off steam—so I banned my 

students from ever visiting it. Poly'd one into a rooster once, 
tossed him into the river… Turns out though that roosters 
can't swim." Halaster then whispers, "Oh, dearest Delganto…
How I miss him." 

• "You're stars, baby! Season eighty-four's goin' grand. You're 

a hit on all the planes—especially the Nine Hells. Devils 
galore are pining for your souls. Ratings could be better 
elsewhere, like the City of Doors, but just wait 'til the mid-
season finale—it'll knock the multiverse's socks right off!" 
Halaster does not shed light on what this "mid-season finale" 
will entail for the party. 

EPILOGUE

Unlike in other installments of the DotMM Companion, 
Skullport doesn't necessitate a send-off unless the Return 
of the Thirteen quest is completed. Thus, the two written 
below assume that it has.  

STANDARD SEND-OFF
And so, you've swept away the darkness from yet another 
corner of Undermountain. Made it brighter. Brighter with 
the emerald flames of cackling undead that history has 
shown are better rulers than distant tyrants. But can you 
truly say that this was for the betterment of anyone? Do 
the downtrodden truly merit an uplifting if it means that 
the wolves that rule above are lifted too? Perhaps you'll 
find out before the world itself does—when Skullport 
opens its harbor to the outside world yet again. 

HALASTER'S GAME: THE HOST'S SEND-OFF
The Mad Mage's voice sets your skin crawling:

"Ah, Skullport. The hive of thieves has been kicked 

back to life and the hornets will sneer in the face of the 
world once again while the desperate and downtrodden 
make their way to this Port of Shadows. I welcome them, 
these desperate fools, for one day soon they too shall play 
a part in my game. They too shall star on Dungeon of the 
Mad Mage, long after you're done and buried."


64

APPENDIX A: ITEMS

The following magic and mundane items can be found
throughout Levels 1-3 and Skullport:

ASSASSIN'S BLOOD
Adventuring Gear, Poison (Ingested)
A creature that ingests this poison must make a DC 10 
Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, it takes 6 
(1d12) poison damage and is poisoned for 24 hours. On a 
successful save, the creature takes half damage and isn't 
poisoned.

Location. This item is sold by Nightshade in SK, A34.

CANDLE OF THE DEEP
Wondrous Item, Common
The flame of this candle is not extinguished when 
immersed in water. It gives off light and heat like a normal 
candle.

Location. This item is additional loot found in L3, Area

10H per the "Additional Loot" variant. 

CARRION CRAWLER MUCUS
Adventuring Gear, Poison (Contact)
A creature that comes into contact with this poison must 
succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or be 
poisoned for 1 minute. The poisoned creature is 
paralyzed. The creature can repeat the saving throw at the 
end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a 
success.

Location. This item is sold by Nightshade in SK, A34.

CIRCLET OF BLASTING
Wondrous item, rare
While wearing this circlet, you can use an action to cast 
the scorching ray spell with it. When you make the spell's 
attacks, you do so with an attack bonus of +5. The circlet 
can't be used again this way until the next dawn.

Location. This magic item is found in L1, Area 39A.

CLOAK OF THE MANTA RAY
Wondrous Item, Uncommon
While wearing this cloak with its hood up, you can 
breathe underwater, and you have a swimming speed of 
60 feet. Pulling the hood up or down requires an action. 

Location. This magic item is gifted by the kuo-toa in 

SK, Area 10 after feeding him.

DRIFTGLOBE
Wonderous item, uncommon
This small sphere of thick glass weighs 1 pound. If you 
are within 60 feet of it, you can speak its command word 
and cause it to emanate the light or daylight spell. Once 
used, the daylight effect can't be used again until the next 
dawn.

You can speak another command word as an action to 

make the illuminated globe rise into the air and float no 
more than 5 feet off the ground. The globe hovers in this 
way until you or another creature grasps it. If you move 
more than 60 feet from the hovering globe, it follows you 
until it is within 60 feet of you. It takes the shortest route 
to do so. If prevented from moving, the globe sinks gently 
to the ground and becomes inactive, & its light winks out.

Location. This magic item is found in L1, Area 17.

DROW POISON
Adventuring Gear, Poison (Injury)
This poison is typically made only by the drow, and only 
in a place far removed from sunlight. A creature injured 
by a weapon coated in this poison must succeed on a DC 
13 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned for 1 hour. If 
the saving throw fails by 5 or more, the creature is also 
unconscious while poisoned in this way. The creature 
wakes up if it takes damage or if another creature takes an 
action to shake it awake.

Location. This item is sold by Nightshade in SK, A34.

DUST OF DISAPPEARANCE
Wondrous Item, Uncommon
Found in a small packet, this powder resembles very fine 
sand. There is enough of it for one use. When you use an 
action to throw the dust into the air, you and each creature 
and object within 10 feet of you become invisible for 2d4 
minutes. The duration is the same for all subjects, and the 
dust is consumed when its magic takes effect. If a creature 
affected by the dust attacks or casts a spell, invisibility 
ends for that creature. 

Location. This magic item is located in L2, Area 26E.

ELEMENTAL GEM (WATER)
Wondrous Item, Uncommon
This gem contains a mote of elemental energy. When you 
use an action to break the gem, a water elemental is 
summoned as if you had cast the conjure elemental spell, 
and the gem's magic is lost.

Location. This magic item is located in L3, Area 20E.

HAT OF WIZARDRY
Wondrous Item, Common (requires attunement by a wizard)
This antiquated, cone-shaped hat is adorned with gold 
crescent moons and stars. While you are wearing it, you 
gain the following benefits:
• You can use the hat as a spellcasting focus for your 

wizard spells.

• You can try to cast a cantrip that you don't know. The 

cantrip must be on the wizard spell list, and you must 
make a DC 10 Intelligence (Arcana) check. If the check 
succeeds, you cast the spell. If the check fails, so does 
the spell, and the action used to cast the spell is wasted. 


65

Regardless, you can't use this property again until you 
finish a long rest.
Location. This magic item is additional loot found in 

L3, Area 10H per the "Additional Loot" variant. 

PHILTER OF LOVE
Potion, Uncommon
The next time you see a creature within 10 minutes after 
drinking this philter, you become charmed by that 
creature for 1 hour. If the creature is of a species and 
gender you are normally attracted to, you regard it as your 
true love while you are charmed.

This potion's rose-hued, effervescent liquid contains 

one easy-to-miss bubble shaped like a heart.

Location. This magic item is additional loot found in 

L2, Area 2B per the "Additional Loot" variant. 

POT OF AWAKENING
Wondrous Item, Common
If you plant an ordinary shrub in this 10-pound lay pot and 
let it grow for 30 days, the shrub magically transforms 
into an awakened shrub at the end of that time. When the 
shrub awakens, its roots break the pot, destroying it.

The awakened shrub is friendly toward you. Absent 

commands from you, it does nothing. 

Location. This magic item is located in L2, Area 26A.

POTION OF ANIMAL FRIENDSHIP
Potion, Uncommon
When you drink this potion, you can cast the animal 
friendship spell (save DC 13) for 1 hour at will. Agitating 
this muddy liquid brings little bits into view: a fish scale, 
a hummingbird tongue, a cat claw, or a squirrel hair.

Location. This magic item is located in L3, Area 21S.

POTION OF HEALING 
Potion, Uncommon
You regain 2d4+2 hit points when you drink this potion. 
This potion's red liquid glimmers when agitated. 

Location. This item is found in L2, 13G & L3, 20B.

POTION OF LIGHTNING RESISTANCE 
Potion, Uncommon
When you drink this potion, you gain resistance to 
lightning damage for one hour.

Location. This additional loot is found in L2, Area 7C.

POTION OF POISON
Potion, Uncommon
This concoction looks, smells, and tastes like a potion of 
healing or other beneficial potion. However, it is actually 
poison masked by illusion magic. An identify spell reveals 
its true nature.

If you drink it, you take 3d6 poison damage, and you 

must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or be 
poisoned. At the start of each of your turns while you are 

poisoned in this way, you take 3d6 poison damage. At the 
end of each of your turns, you can repeat the saving throw. 
On a successful save, the poison damage you take on your 
subsequent turns decreases by 1d6. The poison ends when 
the damage decreases to 0.

Location. This item is sold by Nightshade in SK, A34.

POTION OF WATER BREATHING
Potion, Uncommon
You can breathe underwater for 1 hour after drinking this 
potion. Its cloudy green fluid smells of the sea and has a 
jellyfish-like bubble floating in it.

Location. This magic item is located in L3, Area 9B.

PURPLE WORM POISON
Adventuring Gear, Poison (Injury)
This poison must be harvested from a dead or 
incapacitated purple worm. A creature injured by a 
weapon coated with this poison must make a DC 19 
Constitution saving throw, taking 42 (12d6) poison 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one.

Location. This item is sold by Nightshade in SK, A34.

QUAAL'S FEATHER TOKEN (SWAN BOAT)
Wondrous Item, Rare
You can use an action to touch the token to a body of 
water at least 60 feet in diameter. The token disappears, 
and a 50-foot-long, 20-foot-wide boat shaped like a swan 
takes its place. The boat is self-propelled and moves 
across water at a speed of 6 miles per hour. 

You can use an action while on the boat to command it 

to move or to turn up to 90 degrees. The boat can carry up 
to thirty-two Medium or smaller creatures. A Large 
creature counts as four Medium creatures, while a Huge 
creature counts as nine. The boat remains for 24 hours and 
then disappears. You can dismiss the boat as an action.

Location. This magic item is rewarded by the Mad 

Mage for completing "Halaster's Game" as described in 
Chapter 3: The Sargauth Level. 

RING OF SWIMMING
Ring, Uncommon
You have a swimming speed of 40 feet while wearing this 
ring.

Location. This magic item is located in L2, Area 19B.

WAND OF SECRETS
Wand, uncommon
The wand has 3 charges. While holding it, you can use an 
action to expend 1 of its charges, and if a secret door or 
trap is within 30 feet of you, the wand pulses and points 
at the one nearest to you. The wand regains 1d3 expended 
charges daily at dawn.

Location. This magic item is found in L1, Area 11.


66

APPENDIX B: MONSTERS & NPCS

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Air Elemental...............................................................................67
Allip.............................................................................................67
Animated Ballista ........................................................................67
Apprentice Wizard ......................................................................67
Archmage ....................................................................................68
Assassin ......................................................................................68
Awakened Shrub .........................................................................68
Bandit .........................................................................................68
Bandit Captain ............................................................................69
Barlgura ......................................................................................69
Beholder Zombie ........................................................................69
Berserker .....................................................................................70
Black Pudding .............................................................................70
Blackguard ..................................................................................70
Bugbear .......................................................................................71
Carrion Crawler ..........................................................................71
Cave Fisher .................................................................................71
Champion ....................................................................................72
Chimera ......................................................................................72
Cloaker ........................................................................................72
Commoner ..................................................................................73
Doppelganger ..............................................................................73
Drider ..........................................................................................73
Drow ...........................................................................................74
Drow Elite Warrior .....................................................................74
Drow Mage .................................................................................75
Drow Priestess of Lolth ..............................................................75
Duergar .......................................................................................76
Ettercap .......................................................................................76
Ettin ............................................................................................77
Flameskull ..................................................................................77
Flesh Golem ................................................................................78
Flying Sword ..............................................................................78
Gargoyle .....................................................................................78
Gas Spore ....................................................................................79
Gelatinous Cube ..........................................................................79
Ghast ...........................................................................................79
Ghost ...........................................................................................80
Ghoul ..........................................................................................80
Giant Centipede ..........................................................................80
Giant Crab ...................................................................................81
Giant Rat .....................................................................................81
Giant Spider ................................................................................81
Gibbering Mouther .....................................................................81
Goblin .........................................................................................82
Goblin Boss .................................................................................82
Gray Ooze (Psychic) ...................................................................82
Grell ............................................................................................83
Grick ...........................................................................................83
Grick Alpha ................................................................................83
Grimlock .....................................................................................83

Hobgoblin ................................................................................... 84
Hobgoblin Captain ...................................................................... 84
Hobgoblin Warlord...................................................................... 84
Hunter Shark ............................................................................... 85
Intellect Devourer ....................................................................... 85
Kobold ........................................................................................ 85
Kuo-toa ....................................................................................... 86
Mage ........................................................................................... 86
Manticore ................................................................................... 86
Mezzoloth ................................................................................... 87
Mimic ......................................................................................... 87
Mind Flayer ................................................................................ 87
Minotaur ..................................................................................... 88
Minotaur Skeleton ...................................................................... 88
Mummy ...................................................................................... 88
Nothic ......................................................................................... 89
Ochre Jelly .................................................................................. 89
Oni .............................................................................................. 89
Otyugh ........................................................................................ 90
Phase Spider ............................................................................... 90
Piercer ......................................................................................... 90
Priest ........................................................................................... 91
Quadrone .................................................................................... 91
Quaggoth .................................................................................... 91
Revenant ..................................................................................... 92
Roper .......................................................................................... 92
Rust Monster .............................................................................. 92
Sahuagin Baron .......................................................................... 93
Scout ........................................................................................... 93
Sea Hag ...................................................................................... 93
Shadow ....................................................................................... 94
Shield Guardian .......................................................................... 94
Shrieker ...................................................................................... 94
Skeleton ...................................................................................... 95
Spectator ..................................................................................... 95
Specter ........................................................................................ 95
Spy .............................................................................................. 96
Stirge .......................................................................................... 96
Swarm of Cranium Rats ............................................................. 96
Swarm of Insects (Spider) .......................................................... 96
Thug ........................................................................................... 97
Troglodyte .................................................................................. 97
Troll ............................................................................................ 97
Veteran ....................................................................................... 97
Water Elemental ......................................................................... 98
Wererat ....................................................................................... 98
Will-o'-Wisp ............................................................................... 98
Worg ........................................................................................... 99
Xorn ............................................................................................ 99
Yochlol ..................................................................................... 100
Zombie ..................................................................................... 100


67


68


69


70


71


72


73

VARIANT: DRIDER SPELLCASTING
Driders that were once drow spellcasters might retain their 
ability to cast spells. Such driders typically have a higher 
spellcasting ability (15 or 16) than other driders. Further, 
the drider gains the Spellcasting trait. A drider that was a 
drow divine spellcaster, therefore, could have a Wisdom of 
16 (+3) and a Spellcasting trait as follows:
Spellcasting. The drider is a 7th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (Spell save DC 14, +6 to hit 
with spell attacks). The drider has the following spells
prepared from the cleric spell list:
Cantrips (at will): poison spray, thaumaturgy
1st level (4 slots): bane, detect magic, sanctuary
2nd level (3 slots): hold person, silence
3rd level (3 slots): clairvoyance, dispel magic
4th level (2 slots): divination, freedom of movement


74


75


76


77

VARIANT: STORMSKULLS
Some wizards might be raised not as fiery spirits but ones 
that crackle with lightning. Trenzia, one of the Mad Mage's 
former apprentices, is one of these spirits.

Stormskulls have the statistics of flameskulls but with the 

following changes:

•
The skull has resistance to fire, rather than lightning, 
and immunity to lightning, rather than fire.

•
The skull has lightning bolt prepared instead of 
fireball.

•
The skull's fire ray attack deals lightning damage. 


78


79


80


81


82


83


84


85


86


87


88


89


90


91

VARIANT: QUAGGOTH THONOT
A quaggoth thonot is a normal quaggoth with a challenge 
rating of 3 (700 XP) and the following trait.

Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The quaggoth's innate 

spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 11). The 
quaggoth can innately cast the following spells, requiring 
no components:
At will: feather fall, mage hand (the hand is invisible)
1/day each: cure wounds, enlarge/reduce, heat metal, 

mirror image


92


93


94


95


96


97


98


99


100


